xabstract

Crayfish are one of the most prolific freshwater invaders, yet the role of crayfish as ecosystem engineers
that structure benthic substrates in their nonnative habitat is rarely studied. We used an in situ experimental
manipulation to document changes in sediment dynamics and macroinvertebrate density and richness caused by
the presence or absence of invasive rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus). Rusty crayfish reduced fine-sediment accumulation
and increased pit and mound structures in the river bed by moving gravels at the bed surface. We
predicted that this omnivorous species would directly reduce macroinvertebrate density and richness, but we
found that macroinvertebrate density was higher in treatments with rusty crayfish present and that macroinvertebrate
richness did not differ between treatments with and without crayfish. Our findings suggest that
rusty crayfish, which are spreading throughout the northeast USA, are probably important engineers of physical
habitat structure in stream ecosystems. Rusty crayfish may also have unexpected, facilitative consequences for
other benthic species by reducing fine-sediment accumulation in streams that are sediment impaired. Our study
illustrates that biological forces can influence benthic gravel-size distributions and topography and suggests that
crayfish may be important drivers of substrate-sorting dynamics and disturbance regimes, with consequences for
community structure in streams where they are invasive.

xintroduction

Invasive species pose one of the world’s most pressing
environmental problems (Vitousek et al. 1997, Jenkins
2003). Invasions are occurring across a variety of habitats,
but freshwater systems are particularly sensitive to invasion
by nonnative species compared with their terrestrial
counterparts (Ricciardi and Rasmussen 1999). For example,
in freshwater ecosystems, invaders such as carp (Cyprinidae;
Koehn 2004, Gozlan et al. 2010) and Zebra Mussels
(Dreissena polymorpha; MacIsaac 1996) have dramatically
influenced native species diversity, productivity, and ecosystem
function (Strayer 2010). A significant amount of
funding is allocated toward invasive control and reintroduction
of natives because of substantial changes to natural
habitats and the loss of ecosystem function attributed
to invasive species in many instances (Bernhardt et al.
2005, Pimentel et al. 2005). However, the effects of invasive
species on the structure of ecosystems in the growing
number of urbanized and impaired streams are not well
studied and may differ from effects in pristine systems
(Ricciardi 2001, Smucker and Detenbeck 2014).
Many invaders are ecosystem engineers (Crooks 2002),
which are organisms that affect abiotic features of ecosystems,
including physical habitat characteristics and
biogeochemical cycles (Jones et al. 1994, Jones 2012). In
streams, animals can substantially alter habitat structure,
sediment transport, and nutrient cycling (Moore 2006,
Albertson and Allen 2015). Aquatic animals ranging from
nutria to fishes to macroinvertebrates move gravels, alter
riverbank formation, and make changes to bed topography.
For example, fish can create divots as they build nests
for egg protection, and insects can agitate fine sediments
as they search for food (Zanetell and Peckarsky 1996,
Moore et al. 2004). Biota can regulate substrate dynamics,
including grain-size distributions, sediment erosion during
floods, and fine-sediment suspension levels (Montgomery
et al. 1996, Albertson et al. 2014, Harvey et al.
2014).
Crayfish are one of the most prolific groups of invaders
across the globe (Lodge et al. 2000, 2012, Savini et al. 2010,
Twardochleb et al. 2013). Invasive crayfish pose a particu-
larly significant threat to freshwater ecosystems because
crayfish are ecosystem engineers of both aquatic community
structure and physical habitat. Current evidence for the
effects of crayfish on benthic communities suggests a significant
reduction in macroinvertebrate, fish, and macrophyte
density, shifts in macroinvertebrate and fish community
composition, and an increase in the breakdown of detritus
(Momot et al. 1978, Wilson et al. 2004, Bobeldyk and
Lamberti 2008, 2010). Crayfish are bioturbators that also
can engineer physical habitat by disrupting benthic sediments
as they forage or build shelters (Parkyn et al. 1997,
Statzner et al. 2003, Creed and Reed 2004). Disturbance by
crayfish can loosen riverbed gravels, which subsequently increases
sediment erosion during floods (Statzner et al. 2003,
Statzner and Peltret 2006). The bioturbating activities of
some crayfish species can be extensive and cause complete
riverbank collapse (Guan 1994, Barbaresi et al. 2004), and
the role of crayfish as agents of disturbance may have important
consequences for biodiversity and benthic community
recovery following high-flow events (Resh et al. 1988,
Lake 2000). Crayfish also can alter fine-sediment dynamics
(Harvey et al. 2014), which may influence feedbacks between
sediment suspension, turbidity, and biofilm communities
(Wood 1997, Lawler et al. 2006) and regulate suitable
habitat for fish egg development (Suttle et al. 2004). In
invasions of Europe by Pacifastacus leniusculus and Procambarus
clarkii, crayfish altered aquatic communities and
substantially affected gravel-bed morphology, erosion, and
fine-sediment suspension (Barbaresi et al. 2004, Johnson
et al. 2011, Harvey et al. 2014).
The rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus) is native to the
Ohio River basin and has become invasive in the northeastern
USA. Spread of the invasive rusty crayfish has
been identified as a threat for >4 decades (Lodge et al.
2000, Wilson et al. 2004) and has significantly reduced
native crayfish diversity (Taylor et al. 1996). Orconectes
rusticus moved into southern Pennsylvania (PA), the location
of our research, in the 1960s–1970s (Kuhlmann and
Hazelton 2007, Lieb et al. 2011). It can outcompete native
crayfish species, reduce macroinvertebrates and detritus
(Lodge et al. 1986, Olden et al. 2006), cause shifts in fish
populations (Roth and Kitchell 2005), and reduce standing
stock of macrophytes (Roth et al. 2007).
Several studies now illustrate the strong physicalengineering
role of invasive crayfishes, but despite its rapid
spread, few investigators have explored the role of invasive
O. rusticus in structuring benthic substrate dynamics. We
conducted a field experiment to investigate the influence
of rusty crayfish on benthic substrates and macroinvertebrate
communities. We used an in situ manipulation of
the presence or absence of O. rusticus to address the following
questions: 1) Does O. rusticus change riverbed topography,
sediment sorting, and fine-sediment accumulation?
2) How does O. rusticus influence macroinvertebrate
communities? Our study provides some of the first evidence
of the physical effects of O. rusticus invasions on
gravel disturbance and consequences for benthic communities
and ecosystem processes.

xmethods

Study site
We conducted our study in Valley Creek (lat 40°04′N,
long 75°27′W), situated in Valley Forge National Historic
Park, King of Prussia, PA, from 24 October to 14 November
2014. Valley Creek is an urbanized, perennial
3rd-order tributary of the Schuylkill River. In autumn, it
is ∼10 m wide and 0.24 m deep. In the heavily populated
Schuylkill River basin, 77% of streams are in fair or poor
condition, and forest buffer zones have been reduced
along many waterways (Jackson 2009). Valley Creek is
classified as an impaired stream (VFNHP and PFBCCP
2004, Jackson 2009). Excessive sedimentation, excessive
stormwater, polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contamination,
and channel instability have been identified as primary
drivers of impairment. The hydrologic regime is flashy.
Base flows range from 0.28 m3/s in autumn to 1.70 m3/s in
spring, interspersed with frequent flood events. Discharge
averaged 0.57 m3/s during the study period, and 2 moderate
flow events peaked at 1.12 m3/s on 1 November and
0.85 m3/s on 6 November (US Geological Survey gage
01473169; Fig. 1). Rusty crayfish were first documented in
Valley Creek in 2008 (http://www.nps.gov/kids/features
/2014/crayfishCorps.cfm#). The National Park Servicemanages
rusty crayfish populations in Valley Creek primarily
by using an intensive, volunteer-based removal effort called
the Crayfish Corps.
Experimental design
The experiment contained 2 treatments: crayfish present
or absent (control). We ran the experiment as a complete
block design in which 4 replicates of each treatment
were run in 2 consecutive temporal blocks for a total of
n = 8 for each treatment.We placed 2 wire-mesh (100-mm2
opening) enclosures (0.41 m long × 0.31 m wide × 0.41 m
high) within 0.5 m of each other at the downstream end of
each of 4 riffles (= replicates). We selected cage locations
that were similar in physical condition; velocity averaged
0.3 m/s. We secured cages to rebar and made them flush
with the surrounding substrate. Cages were oriented so
that width was perpendicular and length parallel to the direction
of flow. Leaves and other small debris accumulated
on the front of each cage, but we allowed the debris to remain
for the duration of each temporal block. We filled
cages with gravel mined from the river bed nearby. At the
start of each block, we scrubbed gravel clean and passed it
through sieves to create 2 heterogeneous gravel mixtures of
grain diameters between 5.6 and 11 mm or 22 and 31 mm.
We carefully placed a layer of subsurface gravel (5.6–
11 mm) in the bottom of each enclosure, graded it smooth
by hand, and then covered it by a layer of surface gravel
(22–31 mm) to represent an armored surface layer typical
of gravel-bedded rivers (Dietrich et al. 1989).
The crayfish-present treatment contained 3 crayfish
that were selected to be similar in size (25-mm carapace
length). Crayfish density within the mesh enclosure was
24/m2, which is on the high end but in the range of densities
reported for this species (Momot et al. 1978, Hill and
Lodge 1999). The control treatment was identical but contained
no crayfish. Each block ran for 2 wk, after which we
fully disturbed and cleaned sediments to remove any macroinvertebrates.
After the 1st block, we resieved and graded
the sediments smooth to reset for the 2nd block. All crayfish
survived for the duration of the experiment.
Measurement of the abiotic response
We took photographs of each replicate crayfish cage
with a GoPro Hero 3+ Silver (GoPro, Riverside, California)
at the start and end of each block to estimate
changes in the gravel-bed matrix. We analyzed photos in
the laboratory with ImageJ (Rasband 1997) to calculate
the proportion of the total surface area of the bottom of
each cage where surface gravels had been moved to expose
subsurface material or the bottom of the cage. To
estimate fine-sediment accumulation in the benthos, we
measured total suspended solids (TSS) in a subset of
enclosures (n = 3 control cages and n = 4 crayfish cages)
during block 2. At the end of block 2, we enclosed each
cage with a modified Hess sampler (0.6 m × 0.4 m ×
0.5 m), vigorously disturbed all gravels by hand, and collected
a 1-L water sample. For the purposes of this experiment,
measures of agitated TSS served as a proxy for
benthic sediment accumulation. We processed water samples
in the laboratory by filtering a known volume of wellmixed
sample through a 0.45-μm mixed cellulose ester membrane,
drying the sample at 60°C for 24 h, and weighing
the sample to estimate g/L.
Measurement of the biotic response
At the end of each 2-wk block, we used the same Hess
sampler to isolate each cage and sample macroinvertebrates
(Hauer and Lamberti 2007). We dislodged macroinvertebrates
from surface gravels by hand and swept them into a
mesh (500-μm) drift net secured to a solid frame. This sampling
technique ensured that any collected invertebrates
were from the enclosure. To compare macroinvertebrate
communities and abundances in the experiment to ambient
conditions in Valley Creek, we used Surber samplers on
30 October 2015 to collect macroinvertebrates in n = 2
riffles at the study site. Because of permitting restrictions,
we kept all macroinvertebrates alive during all macroinvertebrate
sampling efforts and enumerated them on site.
We identified insects >500 μm to family to estimate taxon
richness (count of all families/sample) and density (number
of individuals/m2; Merritt et al. 2008) and returned macroinvertebrates
to the stream.
Data analyses
We compared TSS levels across crayfish and control
treatments with a mixed model in which TSS was a function
of the fixed effect of crayfish treatment and the random
effect of riffle location. We compared changes in
bed topography across crayfish treatments by means of
linear mixed effects models in which density of pit structures
or proportion of river bed with subsurface exposed
was a function of the fixed effect of crayfish treatment
and random effects of replicate nested within block and
of riffle location. We compared macroinvertebrate density
and diversity by means of mixed models in which density
or richness was a function of the fixed effect of crayfish
treatment and the random effect of replicate nested within
block and of riffle location. Shannon–Wiener diversity index
(H) was calculated as:
H ¼ −ΣPilnPi; (Eq. 1)
where Pi is the number of the ith species divided by the total
number of individuals counted. In studies conducted in the
field, high variation among sampling replicates is often
expected. Thus, we accepted p ≤ 0.1 as a marginally significant
effect. All analyses were conducted using R (version
3.1.0; R Project for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).

xresults

TSS levels were consistently lower in sediment patches
with crayfish present than in controls, suggesting that cray-
fish activity increased suspension and reduced settling of
fine sediments (t = −2.7, p = 0.1; Fig. 2). Comparison of
photographs of control and crayfish cages before and after
each 2-wk block showed substantial amounts of finesediment
material covering the benthos in control cages
without crayfish (Fig. 3A–D). We found evidence of gravel
movement in the control treatments resulting from small
changes in base flow during the sampling period, but after
2 wk the number of pit and depression structures was significantly
higher in treatments with crayfish present than
in controls (t = 8.5, p < 0.001; Fig. 4A). Crayfish activity
also exposed a significantly greater amount of subsurface
material composed of the smaller grain-size class than was
exposed in control treatments (t = 5.0, p < 0.001; Fig. 4B).
Crayfish activity significantly affected macroinvertebrate
communities, but not in the direction predicted.Macroinvertebrate
density was significantly higher in crayfish
treatments than in controls (t = 2.4, p = 0.04; Fig. 5A).
Species richness did not differ between treatments (t =
1.0, p = 0.35; Fig. 5B). Hydropsychid caddisfly larvae (Hydropsychidae)
and amphipods (Gammaridae) were the most
common macroinvertebrates sampled across all treatments,
and the Shannon–Wiener diversity index was similar between
the crayfish and control treatments (H = 1.57 and
1.59, respectively). Macroinvertebrate density was lower in
the experimental enclosures (crayfish present and absent)
than the ambient macroinvertebrate density in Valley
Creek (Table 1).

xdiscussion

We have shown that the rusty crayfish, an invasive
species spreading throughout the northeastern USA, can
influence substrate dynamics, with potential cascading effects
for aquatic communities. Our results illustrate that
rusty crayfish activity can suspend benthic sediments, reduce
fine-sediment accumulation, and increase pit and
mound morphology within the river bed. Our results further
reveal an increase in macroinvertebrate abundance
in the presence of rusty crayfish. These findings emphasize
the need to understand better the invasion ecology
of crayfish because their engineering effects on the physical
habitat of streams may be more widespread than previously
documented.
In support of findings for other crayfish species, we
found a substantial change in sediment dynamics when
rusty crayfish were present. Orconectes rusticus altered
bed topography similarly to other species for which detailed
measurements of physical substrate dynamics have
been monitored. Crayfish are often associated with gravel
and cobble substrate that provides shelter and refuge
from predators, and crayfish disturb both fine sediments
and gravels (Kershner and Lodge 1995, Statzner et al.
2003, Johnson et al. 2011, Harvey et al. 2014, Magoulick
2014). Changes to grain sorting and movement initiated
by crayfish activity have important implications for erosion
regimes. Gravel arrangement can influence grain protrusion
and friction angles that control when grains move
downstream (Buffington and Montgomery 1999). Grain
orientation can regulate critical shear stress and initial
movement during floods (Carling et al. 1992). In addition,
changes in grain-size distributions associated with the movement
of finer, subsurface gravels toward the surface are
likely to increase bed-material movement during high flows
(Church 2006). Selective removal of fine silt from the gravel
matrix can produce infilling of downstream pool volume
(Lisle and Hilton 1999), and alteration of the fine component
of a gravel matrix also can influence gravel movement
(Curran and Wilcock 2005). Although a growing number
of studies illustrate the effects of crayfish on substratesorting
dynamics, many of these studies, including ours,
have been conducted in laboratory flumes or in small spatial
patches that lack the complexity and heterogeneity of
natural streams. For example, our enclosures did not con-
tain larger gravels that provide shelter space for the crayfish,
a factor that could be considered in future studies
because shelter may alter crayfish engineering effects and
change behavioral interactions between individual crayfish
(Statzner and Peltret 2006). As such, our findings are limited
but suggest the need for additional research linking invasion
ecology and geomorphology at larger field scales (Reinhardt
et al. 2010).
We found that macroinvertebrates were more abundant
in treatments with rusty crayfish present than in
controls. A large portion of crayfish diets consists of detritus
and plant material, but many investigators have shown
that crayfish directly reduce the abundance of their macroinvertebrate
prey across a variety of habitat types, including
lakes and streams, and across a variety of substrates,
including rocks and leaves (Momot et al. 1978, Bobeldyk
and Lamberti 2010, Twardochleb et al. 2013). However,
some evidence suggests that crayfish control of macroinvertebrates
is taxon specific. For example, Lodge et al.
(1994) found that in sandy-bottomed lakes, O. rusticus
reduced snail macroinvertebrate abundance by 99% but
had minimal influence on other macroinvertebrate taxa.
We hypothesize that effects of rusty crayfish on gravel
movement and the removal of fine sediments is context
dependent and particular to food availability, substrate
size, and substrate heterogeneity. In our experiment, the
indirect, facilitative effect of removing fine sediment may
have improved habitat for macroinvertebrates that are
sensitive to sediment accumulation (Richards and Bacon
1994, Wood 1997). Overall macroinvertebrate colonization
in the experiment was lower in both experimental treatments
than natural, ambient macroinvertebrate densities in
Valley Creek, suggesting that colonization of the enclosures
may have been limited, potentially because of the
short time scale of our study. Nevertheless, colonization
was higher in treatments with rusty crayfish than in control
treatments. If rusty crayfish shift macroinvertebrate
communities by increasing their abundance, these effects
may cascade to other trophic levels. For example, the direct
effects of crayfish on biofilm may be minimal (Bobeldyk
and Lamberti 2008, Magoulick 2014), but indirect
effects on biofilm biomass in response to shifts in the invertebrate
grazer community that result from crayfish activity
have been suggested (Charlebois and Lamberti 1996).
Future researchers might investigate links among crayfish,
fine sediment, grazers, and biofilm productivity.
Rusty crayfish can outcompete and eliminate native crayfish
species (Hill and Lodge 1999, Wilson et al. 2004), and
the consequences of native biodiversity loss for ecosystem
functioning are wide reaching (Hooper et al. 2005). Several
behaviors probably drive competition between invasive
rusty crayfish and native crayfish. For example, crayfish
often display aggressive, territorial behaviors as they compete
for food or protect young (Capelli and Munjal 1982),
and rusty crayfish are known to be more efficient predators
of fish eggs than their native counterparts (Sargent et al.
2013). Except for limitations imposed by streams and lakes
with low pH or low Ca, rusty crayfish have been moving
rapidly throughout the midwestern and northeastern USA,
and native crayfish have been declining as a result (Olden
et al. 2006). In PA, shifts in crayfish species distributions
associated with rusty crayfish invasion have been documented,
but the mechanisms driving these shifts and the
physical constraints on rusty crayfish invasion (e.g., substrate
size, pH) have yet to be identified (Lieb et al. 2011).
In a 2003–2006 survey in northern PA, the historically numerically
dominant Orconectes limosus constituted only
2.4% of the crayfish assemblage, whereas O. rusticus was the
most commonly collected crayfish and constituted 37% of
the assemblage. In southern PA sites where O. rusticus has
not yet invaded, O. limosus constituted 52% of the crayfish
assemblage during the same survey. Although O. limosus,
which is native to our study system, can also alter gravelbed
topography (Statzner et al. 2000, 2003), we hypothesize
that the larger body mass, faster growth rate, and higher
density achieved by the rusty crayfish, which has been documented
in other systems with multiple species of crayfish
present (Hill and Lodge 1999, Wilson et al. 2004), may
make it a more effective engineer of stream substrate (Albertson
and Allen 2015), producing increased rates and
depths of substrate disturbance, increased baseflow finesediment
transport rates, and decreased embeddedness of
gravels. Direct comparisons between rusty crayfish and the
abundant and widely distributed mid-Atlantic native spiny
cheek (Orconectes limosus) and Appalachian Brook crayfish
(Cambarus bartonii) are an important next step for
research.
Our cage enclosures isolated the effects of crayfish
and excluded other relatively large organisms known to
disrupt benthic substrates. Fish, in particular, are important
substrate engineers that were excluded from our cages
but can influence grain-size distributions and entrainment
by building redds for eggs or by foraging for food (Flecker
1996, Moore et al. 2004, Hassan et al. 2008). Statzner and
Sagnes (2008) found that crayfish and fish both influence
gravel transport and bed surface characteristics when alone,
but their effects when together in polyculture were less than
expected given their effects in monoculture. The joint influence
of multiple coexisting and interacting animals is
relatively understudied. As a growing body of research highlights
the importance of species traits and mechanistic abilities
in regulating the magnitude of ecosystem engineering
effects on physical habitat conditions, understanding the
relative effect of native vs invasive species, body size, mechanistic
activity (e.g., burrowing vs foraging), and competitive
fitness will be important directions for future research
(Hughes and Stachowicz 2004, Albertson et al. 2014, Allen
et al. 2014).
The relative roles of competitive dominance and environmental
degradation in controlling the effects of invasive
crayfish also deserve further attention (MacDougall
and Turkington 2005, Light and Marchetti 2007). Many
streams in the northeastern USA are impaired (Bernhardt
et al. 2005), and most invasions are occurring in already
highly disturbed ecosystems (Hobbs and Huenneke 1992,
Strayer 2010, Früh et al. 2012). The positive, indirect influence
that we detected of crayfish on macroinvertebrates,
possibly mediated by a reduction in fine sediment
in the substrate, was unexpected but highlights the need
for a better understanding of invasive species in impaired
systems (Ricciardi 2001, Tablado et al. 2010). Invasive
species may be beneficial in some impaired ecosystems,
but the small sample size of our study does not allow us
to make management recommendations. Future work might
address whether crayfish engineers help ameliorate habitat
degradation associated with high fine-sediment loads in
urbanized streams. Some researchers have suggested that
habitat degradation combined with species invasion is a
more likely driver of ecological change than are invasive
dominants alone (Didham et al. 2005). Given the large
amount of funding that is allocated to river restoration,
including removal of invasive crayfish (Gherardi et al.
2013, Rogowski et al. 2013), a better understanding of invasions
may help improve restoration designs that have been
only minimally successful (Stranko et al. 2012, Smucker and
Detenbeck 2014). In freshwater ecosystems, both species
invasion and increased sediment loads because of landuse
change have been identified as significant impairment
factors (Richter et al. 1997), and future investigators should
consider crayfish invasion, crayfish removal, and ecosystem
function in the context of many streams’ modern, impaired
status.
Authors of a growing number of synthesis papers have
emphasized the strong effect that biology can have on physical
habitat conditions in streams (Jones 2012, Statzner
2012). Rusty crayfish engineering effects provide further
evidence that biology can alter substrate dynamics. The
importance of invasive ecosystem engineers is recognized
(Crooks 2002). However, the role of O. rusticus engineers
in structuring benthic substrate dynamics is poorly documented
but may play a critical role in guiding the management
of degraded, sediment-impaired streams where
these crayfish are invasive. Including invasive species across
stream impairment gradients will be an important next step
in studies that incorporate the complexity of ecological dynamics
into models of sediment transport.