xabstract

Aim Ecological theory predicts that invasive ecosystem engineers like the American
beaver (Castor canadensis) in Tierra del Fuego (TDF) affect landscape-level
biodiversity and ecosystem function (BEF) when engineered habitats are novel
or extensive. We tested these hypotheses on freshwater BEF, sampling benthic
habitat and macroinvertebrates in natural lotic (forest and grassland streams)
and natural lentic habitats (bogs, lakes) and beaver-modified lentic ecosystems
(active and abandoned ponds).
Location Tierra del Fuego Archipelago (Chile and Argentina).
Methods To determine effects on patch-scale BEF, we assessed two drivers:
substrate diversity (H′) and benthic organic matter standing crop (BOM,
g m
2). Extent of impact was estimated as relative stream length (%) for each
patch type in four 1000 ha images.
Results The freshwater landscape was 56% free-flowing streams (natural lotic),
13% bogs and lakes (natural lentic) and 31% active and abandoned beaver
ponds (beaver lentic). While engineering significantly modified lotic habitats
(converting them to ponds), the beaver ponds were largely similar to natural
lentic systems, but engineered lentic patches retained more BOM. While
benthic biodiversity in beaver ponds was less than streams, the assemblage
contained no habitat-specific taxa and was a subset of the natural lentic
community.
Main conclusions Invasive beavers engineer habitats whose biodiversity is similar
to the landscape’s natural lentic habitats, but by increasing the surface area
and unit area retention of BOM via its impoundments, this invasion augments
carbon standing stock approximately 72% in watersheds. While this invasion is
considered the largest alteration to TDF’s forested biome in the Holocene, here
we discover that its impact is to ecosystem function, rather than biodiversity in
the aquatic landscape.

xintroduction

Understanding the role of species in ecosystems is an important
question with theoretical and applied dimensions that
relate to both ecological science and conservation practice
(Jones & Lawton, 1995). We know that nonlinearities exist
in these relationships; some species display particular traits
or behaviours that result in greater impact than would be
expected from their numbers or biomass alone (e.g. keystone
species, Power et al., 1996). Ecosystem engineering is one
conceptual proposal to describe and explain specifically how
certain species affect ecosystems by changing the physical
environment via the creation, modification and destruction
of habitat (Jones et al., 1994). In so doing, ecosystem engineers
influence patterns and processes of biodiversity and
ecosystem function (BEF) (Wright et al., 2002; Wright &
Jones, 2004; Anderson & Rosemond, 2007; Badano &
Marquet, 2008). Concepts such as ecosystem engineering can
help ecological research effectively formulate research questions
and develop predictive understandings of ecological
outcomes like explaining the direction and magnitude of
changes in the structure and function of ecosystems.
In addition to linking species identity with BEF, it is also
important to integrate the effects of scale. For example, ecosystem
engineers can influence species richness by affecting
landscape-scale habitat heterogeneity (Wright et al., 2002)
and/or patch-scale habitat productivity (Wright & Jones,
2004). Basic ecological theory then allows us to predict the
direction and magnitude of these impacts, based on understanding
the relationship between patch- versus landscapelevel
conditions. If the engineered ecosystem constitutes a
unique landscape unit with a habitat-specific biotic community,
compared with surrounding patches, the role of the
ecosystem engineer would be expected to enhance gamma
diversity in the landscape. Similarly, if the extent of the
impact were great enough to dominate the entire landscape,
then we would also anticipate that the magnitude of the
effect to biodiversity would be large in either a positive or
negative direction, depending on the relative difference
between the engineered and unmodified habitats. Finally,
while the impact of an ecosystem engineer on landscape-level
patterns of species diversity depends on the surrounding
context of habitat-specific species assemblages and the similarity
between communities, the addition of novel habitat
conditions in a landscape could be expected to produce
cumulative effects on ecosystem function (e.g. increases or
decreases in rates and standing crops of materials and
energy).
As a recognized component of global ecological change, it
is imperative that we develop a better understanding of how
invasive species drive BEF patterns and processes, and the
lack of such a predictive understanding has been a major critique
of the field of invasion biology (Davis et al., 2011). In
this context, the ecosystem engineer concept provides an
explanatory mechanistic framework regarding the role of
invasive species in novel ecosystems (Crooks, 2002; Anderson
et al., 2009). Specifically, it offers a way to test the indirect
and broader-scale impacts of invasive species on ecosystems
and landscapes, rather than focusing on their direct impacts
related to predation or competition (Valenzuela et al., 2014).
The North American beaver (Castor canadensis Kuhl 1820)
is an emblematic invasive ecosystem engineer that has
received substantial scientific, conservation and media attention
in the Tierra del Fuego (TDF) Archipelago (Choi, 2008;
Anderson et al., 2011). Fifty beavers were introduced near
Fagnano Lake in 1946 (Fig. 1), and since that time, the
population has expanded to inhabit most of the archipelago,
and on the mainland, it has colonized as far north as Puerto
Natales, Chile (Valenzuela et al., 2014). In southern Patagonia,
beavers fill a unique ecological niche; there are no
ecologically or evolutionarily equivalent species that forage
and physically alter streams in the same way. However, natural
lentic habitats, such as lakes and peat bogs, are abundant
in this post-glacial landscape. These natural lentic landscape
units may or may not be equivalent to beaver ponds, as it is
unknown whether the key physical characteristics of natural
impoundments are similar to those engineered by the beaver.
On the other hand, regardless of whether beaver ponds are
quantitatively and qualitatively similar to unmodified
impoundments, their damming activities would be expected
to increase the retention of materials and alter ecosystem
processes in invaded watersheds (Anderson & Rosemond,
2007; Anderson & Rosemond, 2010; Ulloa et al., 2012). Therefore,
we predict that the beaver’s influence on biodiversity will
depend on the landscape’s broader context, while the effect on
ecosystem function is expected to be cumulative.
To test this hypothesis, we compared the patch- and
landscape-level effects of invasive beavers on BEF in freshwater
bodies in TDF. We predicted that if the patch-level
habitat conditions of beaver-impacted streams were largely
the same as natural lentic features, then beavers would not
significantly alter stream biodiversity at the landscape scale,
despite its large and negative effect at the patch scale compared
to unmodified streams (Anderson & Rosemond,
2007). At the same time, this invasion’s influence on
broader processes, such as carbon retention and standing
crop, would be expected to be large and a function of the
overall magnitude and extent of the engineered ecosystems
in the landscape.

xmethods

Study site
The study was conducted between 2003 and 2006 in both
the Argentine and Chilean portions of the TDF Archipelago,
which encompasses the islands south of the Strait of Magellan.
Since their initial introduction in 1946, beavers have colonized
most of the archipelago, and as of the 1990s were
also established on the mainland (Anderson et al., 2009). As
a result of its relatively recent glaciation and fragmented
geography, the archipelago’s native vertebrate community is
relatively species poor, especially potential predators of
beavers (Anderson et al., 2006; Valenzuela et al., 2014). At
the same time, this glacial history has left a landscape with
natural lentic features including lakes, ponds and bogs. The
archipelago’s only large native herbivore is the guanaco
(Lama guanicoe Muller 1776), but there are no ecological
equivalents to the beaver’s herbivory or dam-building/flooding
behaviours.
Patch and landscape characterization
The Fuegian Archipelago includes a mosaic of habitat
patches and a precipitation gradient from the Pacific to the
Atlantic Oceans (Moore, 1983). To characterize this landscape,
we used four 1000 ha Quickbird satellite images
taken from across the archipelago at the following sites from
west to east: Karukinka (2005), Kareken (2004), Navarino
(2002) and Malvinera (2006) (Table 1; Fig. 1). We classified
landscape into three major habitat categories: (1) natural
lotic, (2) natural lentic and (3) beaver impacted. Natural
lotic patches were habitats with free-flowing streams that
passed through forests or grasslands. Natural lentic patches
were lakes and peat bog ponds. Beaver-engineered lentic
habitats included both active and abandoned ponds with
constrained water flow. Sites classified as beaver ponds were
previously lotic, as evidenced by the surrounding habitat
conditions and/or standing dead trees in the pond or riparian
zone. No beaver ponds were chosen in natural lentic
habitat (e.g. beaver impoundments in lake outflows,
Sphagnum bogs).
We collected abiotic and biotic data from a total of 55
aquatic patches between 2003 and 2006 (26 in the west, 18
in the south and 11 in the eastern portion of the study area).
In each, we assessed substrate diversity and benthic organic
matter (BOM) standing crop, which were previously
described by Anderson & Rosemond (2007) as being influential
in producing observed patterns of taxonomic richness
and ecosystem function for benthos. Substrate characteristics
were measured at each site with Wolman pebble counts to
quantify particle size distribution (Harrelson et al., 1994),
and these values were then used to calculate substrate diversity
by applying a Shannon–Weiner index to the abundance
of particular pebble count size classes. Benthic macroinvertebrates
and BOM were collected with a core sampler
(0.07 m2) whose contents were passed through a 250-lm
sieve. Contents were preserved in 70% ethanol. In the
laboratory, macroinvertebrate specimens were separated from
BOM and were identified to the lowest taxonomic level,
which was usually genus or species (see Appendix S1). For
some taxa, such as Chironomidae dipterans, we only arrived
to subfamily or tribe level. In addition, the length of each
specimen was measured to determine biomass with length–
weight regressions developed by Benke et al. (1999) and
Miserendino (2001). BOM was dried at 60 °C, weighed,
ashed at 500 °C and reweighed to calculate g ash-free dry
mass (AFDM) m
2. In each stream, three to four subsamples
were taken to determine an average per site, which was then
used as the statistical unit of replication.
Analyses
To determine the beaver’s effects on patch-level aquatic BEF,
we first used JMP 10 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) to
conduct one-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with a
Tukey’s post hoc honestly significant difference (HSD) test
that compared the means for substrate diversity, BOM,
benthic macroinvertebrate taxa richness, benthic macroinvertebrate
diversity (Shannon–Weiner) and benthic macroinvertebrate
biomass between the three patch types (natural lotic,
natural lentic and beaver lentic). To determine the beaver’s
effects on landscape-level aquatic BEF, we used EstimateS 8.2
(Colwell et al., 2012) to calculate diversity (Shannon–Weiner)
and to estimate taxonomic richness (Coleman rarefaction),
based on a randomized dataset (n = 100) constructed
from the percentage contribution of each patch type (natural
lotic + natural lentic) and the landscape with beaver impacts
(natural lotic + natural lentic + beaver lentic) (Table 1).
These results were used to project species accumulation
curves using the biodiversity indicators described above (Colwell
et al., 2012). Significance between curves was assumed if
the 95% confidence interval of the responses did not overlap
(Badano & Cavieres, 2006). The natural landscape’s patch
percentages were determined based on converting the beaver-
engineered patches to the habitat type of the adjacent
area, which can be determined visually from satellite images.
To compare the similarity and composition of the benthic
macroinvertebrate assemblage between the patch types, we
employed two detrended correspondence analyses (DCA, Hill
& Gauch, 1980) in PC-Ord 5 (McCune & Mefford, 1999).
DCA was selected because it is the only ordination technique
that simultaneously analyses sampling units and species,
thereby allowing the examination of ecological interrelationships,
such as species habitat affinities, in a single-step analysis
(Ludwig & Reynolds, 1988). In the first DCA, the data
matrix included benthic macroinvertebrate species abundance
by plot and was processed (1) without down-weighting for
rare species and (2) with axis rescaling (Hill, 1979; Greenacre,
1984; Manly, 1994). In the second DCA, which was processed
(1) without down-weighting for rare species and (2)
without axis rescaling, benthic macroinvertebrate species
abundances were averaged for patch type to highlight differences
among species habitat affinities, which were classified
by their rarity as the following: singletons (only one specimen
collected), rare (2–10 specimens), common (11–100
specimens) and very common (more than 100 specimens).
Finally as a complementary methodology, we employed a
multiresponse permutation procedure (MRPP, Mielke et al.,
1976) to detect differences within and between previously
defined groups.
Total BOM standing crop was estimated in the watershed
network for each study area, using the calculations of the longitudinal
length of each patch type and multiplying this value
by the means obtained for patch-specific BOM standing crop
(g AFDM m
2) for the entire stream network. This estimation
is a low representation of the actual amount for the watershed,
since using length of the network, we do not account for area.
As such, this calculation was based on a 1-m-wide water body,
which is an underestimate considering the increase that
beavers also create in water body width. From this result, we
obtained a total g AFDM value for each study area with and
without beavers and calculated the percentage change caused
by the presence of beaver-engineered habitats.

xresults

Comparison of natural and engineered freshwater
habitat patches
Ecosystem engineering by invasive beavers transformed
between 20 and 43% of the studied hydrological networks
(mean  SE = 30.5  6.2%) (Table 1). The Fuegian freshwater
landscape was conformed primarily of natural lotic
stream habitat types that included forests and grasslands, but
natural lentic ecosystems were also present along 6–25% of
the network’s total length. The most extensive beaver impact
was abandoned ponds.
As expected, beaver-impacted patches displayed significantly
different physical and biotic characteristics than natural
lotic habitats, and they displayed both similarities and differences
with natural lentic patches. For example, beavers significantly
reduced substrate diversity compared with flowing
streams, but displayed very similar parameters to the natural
conditions recorded for peat bog ponds and lakes (Table 2).
Ecosystem engineering by invasive beavers caused BOM
standing crop to significantly increase, while benthic macroinvertebrate
diversity and richness significantly decreased, compared
with natural lotic habitats (Table 2). Meanwhile,
natural lentic patches occupied an intermediate position. Benthic
macroinvertebrate biomass was greater in both beaverimpacted
and natural lentic patches, compared with natural
lotic sections, but this result was not statistically significant.
Patch- versus landscape-level effects on BEF
DCA results showed a segregation of plots between lotic
and lentic patch groups (Fig. 2a), which was driven by
habitat-specific species affinities (Fig. 2b) (total variance in the
species data = 4.16; axis 1 = eigenvalue 0.7118; axis 2 = eigenvalue
0.2698). For example, blackflies (Gigantodax spp.) and
glossosomatid caddisflies (Matigoptila brevicornuta Schmid)
were associated with natural lotic patches, while diving beetles
(Dyt: Dytiscidae), midges (Chironomidae) and water fleas
(Cladocera) were representative of lentic zones. MRPP indicated
that benthic macroinvertebrate community similarity was
homogeneous within patch types (T = 8.218; A = 0.048;
P < 0.001, Fig. 2a), but significantly different between lotic and
both lentic groups. No difference was observed between natural
and beaver lentic communities (beaver lentic vs. natural lentic:
T = 1.54, A = 0.01; P = 0.08; beaver lentic vs. natural lotic:
T = 8.11, A = 0.05, P < 0.001; natural lentic vs. natural lotic:
T = 7.89, A = 0.05, P < 0.001).
A closer examination of each patch’s species assemblage
(by the second DCA, Fig. 3) found that lotic zones not only
were the most diverse ecosystems for benthos, but they also
hosted a high number of rare and singleton species,
including mayflies (Massartellopsis irarrazavali Demoulin,
Metamonius anceps Eaton), beetles (Scirtidae), caddisflies
(M. brevicornuta) and stoneflies (Antarctoperla michaelseni
Klapalek). Natural lentic areas also had more habitat-specific
taxa (e.g. the dragonfly Aeshna variagata Fabricius) than beaver-
engineered ponds, which were conformed by species that
are common elsewhere (e.g. Chironomidae, Oligochaete).
Daphnia sp. was the only ‘rare’ taxa associated with beaverimpacted
lentic habitats, but its order (Cladocera) was found
as very common in both beaver-impacted and unmodified
lentic bodies (Fig. 3).
At the landscape-level, we did not find a difference in benthic
diversity or richness in landscape scenarios that included
only natural habitats and those that had both natural patches
and beaver-impacted areas (Fig. 4). In contrast, however, the
beaver’s influence on the ecosystem function associated with
carbon standing crop increased by an average of
71.6  17.1% (ranging from 43.6% to 111.3%) in the
studied watersheds.

xdiscussion

Context matters
The introduction of North American beavers has arguably
caused the largest transformation of TDF’s forests in the
Holocene (Anderson et al., 2009). Specifically with regard to
their impact on freshwater ecosystems, we have previously
shown that the ecosystem engineering caused by invasive
beavers decreases benthic biodiversity and increases ecosystem
function at the patch scale (Anderson & Rosemond,
2007; Anderson & Rosemond, 2010). Furthermore, when
compared to forestry, another potentially large-scale impact
to this biome, the beaver’s influence was found to be greater
with regard to benthic community structure and function
(Simanonok et al., 2011). However, the present study illustrates
that the landscape context matters when extrapolating
the importance of this invasion’s impact to broader spatial
scales.
Specifically, while beavers did affect approximately 30% of
stream networks, about 56% still remained free flowing.
Therefore, beavers have not completely dominated entire
watersheds or the landscape by converting all streams to
ponds. Furthermore, while they reduced the diversity of benthos
as compared to that found in natural lotic patches, they
only generated biotic assemblages in their engineered lentic
patches that were very similar to those found in natural
lentic habitats. For instance, we find such common taxa as
midges and worms in beaver ponds, as well as other habitats.
This subset of species is not unique to beaver ponds, but
rather are mostly common species elsewhere (Anderson &
Rosemond, 2007).
Therefore, invasive beavers ultimately had no measurable
influence on stream landscape-level biodiversity, but they did
change the ecosystem function related to carbon cycling. By
engineering new lentic habitats with greater retention than
previous lotic zones, the overall BOM carbon budget in these
benthic ecosystems increased by about 70% at the stream
network scale. Previous research has shown that beaver-
induced increases in BOM affect stream food webs,
enhancing secondary production of benthos by an order of
magnitude (Anderson & Rosemond, 2010) and transitioning
benthic production and BOM decomposition rates in sub-
Antarctic streams to values more similar to temperate zones
(Anderson & Rosemond, 2007; Ulloa et al., 2012). It should
be noted, however, that the effects of beavers on other
ecosystem functions need to be more fully explored, as our
analyses have only focused on benthic ecosystems.
Furthermore, it is known that adjacent marine food webs
incorporate terrestrial organic matter (Romero et al., 2004),
but to date, there has been no quantification of this
ecosystem process or beaver’s role in modifying it.
At the same time, various studies elsewhere have provided
evidence that ecosystem engineering has a positive landscape-
level effect on species richness (Wright et al., 2002; Lill
& Marquis, 2003; Castilla et al., 2004; Badano & Cavieres,
2006). However, our results help confirm that this is not a
characteristic of the ecosystem engineering per se. Rather, the
proportion and similarities/differences of modified and
unmodified habitats in the broader landscape context determine
the magnitude and direction of ecosystem engineering
impacts by native or exotic species (Wright et al., 2004). We
found, therefore, that the beaver’s impact on landscape-level
stream biodiversity was predictable by combining the ecosystem
engineering framework with basic ecological understanding
(i.e. the relationship between habitat heterogeneity and
species diversity). In addition, as beavers did not transform
all of the natural lotic streams into ponds, their patch-level
effect of decreasing stream benthic macroinvertebrate diversity
was not generalized for the entire landscape as part of
this invasion.
At the same time, the beaver’s invasion still can be considered
a large and important landscape-level phenomenon.
Therefore, rather than concluding from these data that the
invasive beaver is not harmful to TDF because it ‘merely’
engineers ponds whose benthic biodiversity is similar to natural
lentic habitats, we can now more precisely determine
the actual way it has transformed this landscape, which is via
effects on ecosystem processes. Other studies have also
shown that this invasive species not only changes standing
crops, but increases decomposition rates of BOM (Ulloa
et al., 2012).
What we still need to know about invasive beavers
in Tierra del Fuego
As a result of the beaver’s impacts in what is otherwise considered
a largely pristine wilderness area (Mittermeier et al.,
2003), conservationists and environmental managers have
worked to define control and/or eradication programmes for
the beaver in southern Patagonian forests (Malmierca et al.,
2011). In this scenario, a number of important research areas
still remain to be explored regarding the role of this invasive
species in engineering a novel Fuegian landscape, particularly
areas related to management and social perceptions of beavers
(Anderson et al., 2011). However, specifically regarding
the ecological role of invasive beavers, it is important to
consider further how these changes to ecosystem processes
can include even potential and fundamental ecosystem state
shifts. For example, by retaining sediments and organic
matter in the stream, beavers can ultimately modify the
hydrogeomorphology that connects floodplains and streams
(Westbrook et al., 2011).
Furthermore, the role of exotic beavers in affecting patchversus
landscape-level patterns and processes of riparian ecosystems
and biota requires a modification of our hypotheses,
but we believe still should be predictable based on the basic
conceptual model used here of the role of invasive ecosystem
engineers. While the effect of beavers to freshwater biota and
ecosystems may be to produce patches that are very similar
to the natural lentic habitats already found in the Fuegian
landscape, we would not anticipate a priori that this would
be the case for riparian BEF. As the beaver’s flooding and
foraging habits have no evolutionary or ecological equivalent
for the adjacent terrestrial zone, unlike the introduction of
C. canadensis to Europe where C. fiber previously evolved,
this modified habitat would not be expected to have analogues
in the landscape. Indeed, we have determined that
these riparian zones also are not resilient to beaver disturbance
(Wallem et al., 2010), and one of the most important
ecological research areas for the future of riparian restoration
efforts will be to determine effective and efficient ways to
regenerate the BEF of these modified terrestrial habitats
(Anderson et al., 2009).