xabstract
Range expansions of species comprise a pervasive environmental problem worldwide and can cause substantial ecological and economic impact. However, the magnitude of impact may vary across habitats, highlighting the need to account for spatial heterogeneity in assessment studies. Here we compare invertebrate community structure in three habitats (littoral, sublittoral, and profundal) of boreal lakes that suffer recurring blooms of a regionally expanding, nuisance flagellate, Gonyostomum semen (Raphidophyta), with the assemblage structure in lakes were no blooms occur. We contrast community structure over a 6-year period using univariate metrics (total abundance, community evenness, species richness, and Simpson diversity) and multivariate community similarity to infer habitat-specific associations of local (alpha) diversity. We also calculated indices of multivariate dispersion to infer associations with beta diversity; i.e., whether or not habitats in bloom lakes show faunal homogenisation. Results show that the magnitude of assemblage alteration in bloom relative to bloom-free lakes varied with habitat and increased from the littoral to the profundal habitats. Littoral assemblages in bloom and bloom-free lakes shared similar alpha (taxon richness, evenness and Simpson diversity) and beta diversity characteristics, despite differing in multivariate community similarity. By contrast, alteration of assemblage structure was most severe in the profundal and manifested in reduced diversity and faunal homogenisation (i.e. decreased beta diversity) in bloom relative to bloom-free lakes. This was due to numerical dominance of the predatory phantom midge, Chaoborus flavicans, in the profundal of bloom lakes. Not only do the results highlight that spatial heterogeneity should be accounted for to assess the potential broader impact of nuisance species on biodiversity within lakes; more generally, the dominance of a single species suggests a reduced overall resilience of bloom lakes, making them more susceptible to environmental perturbation.

xintroduction
The rates of uncontrolled range expansions of species, often fuelled through broad-scale environmental change (Dukes and Mooney, 1999), are currently unprecedented and comprise a pervasive environmental problem around the globe (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005; Riccardi, 2007). Many negative ecological and economic consequences of invasions have been documented in the literature; these consequences include the loss of native biodiversity, homogenisation of communities and altered functions leading to a reduced provision of ecosystem goods and services (Vitousek et al., 1997; Wilcove et al., 1998; Mack et al., 2000; Rahel, 2002; Koel et al., 2005; Simberloff et al., 2005). Such effects can be especially pronounced under mass developments of invading species in ecosystems. Rapid evolutionary adaptation can make invaders resistant to management interventions, thereby posing serious challenges to biological conservation (Lee, 2002). Given that the impacts of invasive species are context-dependent (Riccardi and Atkinson, 2004), ecologists and managers need to better understand specific invasions to mitigate their negative effects as much as possible.Boreal lakes are currently facing a range expansion of the bloom-forming raphidophycean flagellate Gonyostomum semen (Ehrenberg) Diesing (Eloranta and Ja ̈rvinen, 1991; Lepisto ̈ et al., 1994). Global warming and recovery from anthropogenic acidifi- cation, including increasing water colour of lakes (Angeler and Johnson, 2012; Rengefors et al., 2012), seem to be the underlying environmental correlates of G. semen invasions (Eloranta and Ra ̈ike, 1988; Findlay et al., 2005; Rengefors et al., 2008) and resulting bloom events during which the phytoplankton commu- nity can be dominated by as much as 98% for extended periods by this alga (Le Cohu et al., 1989). A reduction of recreational services (allergic skin reactions in swimmers) and clogging of filters in water treatment plants have been documented during G. semen blooms (Cronberg et al., 1988; Hongve et al., 1988), reflecting its negative effects on lake ecosystem service provision. The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency therefore treats this alga as a noxious species, but currently lacks science-based information necessary for effective management.The incidence and duration of algal blooms is likely to increase with global warming in marine (Rabalais et al., 2009; Grane ́ li et al., 2011) and freshwater ecosystems (Jo ̈ hnk et al., 2008; Vilhena et al., 2010), and algal blooms are often considered the consequences of perturbations that affect ecosystems structure, function and services (Pickhardt et al., 2002; Rondel et al., 2008). The environmental problems related to G. semen blooms are likely to extend further across boreal lakes with broad-scale environmental change, and a complex life cycle that facilitates the survival of harsher environmental conditions in the form of resting stages in the sediments complicates management of this alga. This high- lights the need for further research to understand the full range of negative ecological effects of G. semen on lake ecosystems. Such information is especially needed regarding its broader impact on biodiversity. In this paper, we study the structural responses of benthic invertebrate communities to the recurring bloom events of G. semen. Invertebrates play important functional roles in aquatic ecosystems (e.g., secondary production, leaf litter processing, nutrient cycling, matter fluxes; Wallace and Webster, 1996), and are therefore often used as indicators of human pressure in lakes (Johnson et al., 1993). Because 6-year time series in three lakes with and three without bloom formation were analysed, this study provides the opportunity to study ecologically realistic associa- tions of biodiversity characteristics across habitats in boreal lakes as a function of recurring bloom events.Many studies quantify the ecological impact of invasive species across different ecosystem types to understand the broader ecological consequences of invasions (e.g., Gaertner et al., 2009). Because the impact of invasive species on community structure and ecosystem processes can vary across habitats within an ecosystem (Alvarez and Cushman, 2002; Higgins and Vander Zanden, 2010), multi-habitat comparisons are needed to accurate- ly understand ecosystem-level responses and provide more integral management information to avoid bias that might occur if only a few habitats are studied that do not represent the full range of ecological conditions of an ecosystem. In lakes, abiotic and biotic conditions of littoral, sublittoral, and profundal habitats differ in terms of nutrient concentrations, light and oxygen availability, vegetation structure and food web complexity (O’Sullivan and Reynolds, 2003), and invertebrate diversity decreases from the littoral to the profundal habitats (Stendera and Johnson, 2008). The ecological differences across these habitats need to be accounted for to assess biodiversity patterns between bloom and bloom-free lakes to provide integral informa- tion for environmental management and policy.Alteration of invertebrate community structure in bloom relative to bloom-free lakes is expected to be contingent on the spatial location of these habitats within the lakes. Bloom events last 1–3 months during summer when all habitats are exposed similarly to blooms because of diurnal migrations that G. semen carries out to optimally exploit a range of ecosystem conditions (Salonen and Rosenberg, 2000). Although the determination of causes is difficult in correlative research, several mechanisms seem plausible for explaining expected alteration of biodiversity elements in lakes affected by blooms. For instance, organic matter accumulates and decomposition increases in the profundal, the deepest part of the lakes, after blooms have collapsed. Communi- ties in profundal habitats may therefore be proportionally more impacted by blooms than the communities in sublittoral or littoralhabitats because of the ecological alterations that may arise not only during but also after the blooms (lag effects). Direct effects could be due to trichocysts, cells in Gonyostomum that are capable of producing massive amounts of slime during bloom events that could interfere with resource use of invertebrates; lag effects could be due to the alteration of resource conditions, including an accumulation of organic matter and increased oxygen consump- tion that might result in stressful conditions for the invertebrates (Trigal et al., 2011).The detection of ecological impact on communities can vary with chosen metrics (e.g. Johnson and Hering, 2009; Angeler and Goedkoop, 2010) or the scale at which biodiversity is studied (i.e., alpha vs beta diversity) (e.g., Olden and Rooney, 2006; Hillebrand et al., 2010). For instance, invading species can reduce species richness at local scales, resulting in decreased alpha diversity (Gaertner et al., 2009; Vila` et al., 2011). Similarly, across-habitat diversity (beta diversity) may be reduced resulting in regional taxonomic homogenisation of communities due to invasions (Olden et al., 2008; Michelan et al., 2010). However, because the effects of species invasion can vary with environmental context (Riccardi and Atkinson, 2004), the responses of alpha and beta diversity may also be context specific and evident at one but not necessarily at both scales of diversity. We therefore study alpha and beta diversity to strengthen inference about invertebrate community structure in bloom and bloom-free lakes. Community structure is evaluated using univariate metrics (total abundance, taxon richness, evenness, Simpson index) and multivariate techniques (non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS), mul- tivariate permutational ANOVA (PERMANOVA) and percentage similarity analysis (SIMPER)). In the context of this study, these methods are used to infer within-habitat differences in commu- nity structure between bloom and bloom-free lakes, and provide opportunities to assess alpha diversity characteristics of inverte- brates across the three habitats under study in both lake types. Calculating indices of multivariate dispersion (Anderson et al., 2006), we also assess beta diversity patterns in bloom-free and bloom lakes; that is, whether the habitat-specific patterns of spatial turnover of invertebrate communities, determined through the average distance of habitat samples to a group (habitat) centroid in multivariate ordination space, differs between bloom and bloom-free lakes. Specifically, we test the following hypotheses:(1) Within-habitat community structure, including alpha diversity characteristics, and spatial turnover patterns (beta diversity) differ between bloom and bloom-free lakes.(2) The magnitude of alteration of alpha and beta diversity characteristics in bloom relative to bloom-free lakes varies with habitat.(3) Bloom impacts vary through time and depend on the magnitude of bloom development.
xmethods
2.1. Study and sampling designSix lakes (Table 1) were sampled for benthic invertebrates once every year in autumn during a six-year period spanning 1999– 2004. All lakes were located within the boreonemoral ecoregion in southern Sweden and were characterised by a medium to high humic content (water colour > 25 mg Pt L 1) and a relatively small size (<1.5 km2). Three lakes (A ̈ lgsjo ̈ n, Gysla ̈ ttasjo ̈ n, Rotehogstja ̈ r- nen) formed G. semen blooms (biovolume > 1.5 mm3 L 1; Angeler et al., 2010) during at least 1–2 months during each year. The second set of lakes (Brunnsjo ̈ n, Lien, Fra ̈ cksjo ̈ n) had a very low contribution of G. semen (<5% of total phytoplankton biovolume) and never formed blooms during the study period (<1 mm3 L 1). These lakes are considered bloom-free reference lakes in this study. Otherwise the variables shown in Table 1 did not differ significantly between bloom and bloom-free lakes (Wilcoxon test, P > 0.l), highlighting similar physicochemical conditions between these two lake types.To evaluate the dynamics of G. semen, phytoplankton was sampled in monthly intervals during the ice-free period between May and October. Samples of phytoplankton were collected with a tube sampler from the epilimnion in the open-water mid-lake area of each lake. Taxonomic analyses and species enumeration were done under an inverted microscope using a modified Utermo ̈hl technique (Olrik et al., 1989). Biovolumes (mm3 L 1) were calculated from geometric shapes following Blomqvist and Herlitz (1998).Invertebrates were sampled in three habitat types (littoral, sublittoral and profundal) once a year in autumn (October/ November). Littoral macroinvertebrate samples were collected in all lakes using standardised kick sampling with a hand net (0.5- mm mesh). Five standardised kick samples (20-s duration, 1 m long, ca 0.5–1 m depth) were taken from stony, vegetation-free sites in each lake. Sublittoral macroinvertebrates were evaluated from five Ekman samples taken within a 50 m   100 m rectangular area at 4–6m depth. Profundal macroinvertebrate collections consisted of five Ekman samples taken within a 150 m   150 m quadrate in the deepest area of the lake. Samples were preserved in 70% ethanol in the field. All invertebrate samples were sorted under 10  magnification and invertebrates were counted using dissecting and light microscopes. Organisms were identified generally to the species level, except some chironomid larvae and immature Oligochaeta.2.2. Statistical analyses2.2.1. Univariate analysesCommunity metrics of invertebrates (total abundance, taxon richness, the evenness index (Pielou, 1966) and the Simpson diversity index) were calculated for each year (between 1999 and 2004) and habitat (littoral, sublittoral, and profundal) in Primer 6 (Primer-E Ltd, Plymouth, UK). Repeated measures analysis of variance (rm-ANOVA) was carried out in Statistica v.5 (Statsoft Inc, Tulsa, OK, USA) to test for significant differences in these community metrics across habitats and lake types. We tested for ‘‘lake type’’ (bloom vs bloom-free lakes), ‘‘habitat’’ (littoral, sublittoral, profundal) and ‘‘time’’ (sampling years between 1999 and 2004) effects and their interactions. These factors comprised the independent variables while the community metrics com- prised the dependent variables in the analysis. All data were log- transformed prior to analyses to fulfil the requirements of parametric tests. Because sphericity assumptions were violated, degrees of freedom (df) were adjusted according to Huynh and Feldt (1976) to obtain more accurate significance levels (note that df can be expressed as decimals as a result of this correctionprocedure). Preliminary analysis revealed that the ANOVA results were susceptible to Type 2 statistical errors, with significant interaction terms that had a relevant effect size going undetected after Holm correction of P levels. Following the recommendation of Nakagawa (2004), we determined estimates of effect size and calculated variance components for each term in the model (Appendix A), and made inference at P   0.05 to reduce the risk of false negatives in favour of false positives. When significant habitat effects were detected, a posteriori pairwise comparisons were carried out using the Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test. We consider significant interaction terms between lake type   habitat and lake type   habitat   time crucial for inferring differences in invertebrate community structure between bloom and bloom-free lakes. If the studied metrics of invertebrate community structure differ between bloom and bloom-free lakes, presumably as a function of different strengths of bloom development across habitats, these terms shall become significant.2.2.2. Multivariate analysesWe used nonmetric multidimensional scaling ordinations (NMDS) to represent multivariate community structure in the littoral, sublittoral and profundal habitats of bloom and bloom-free lakes. The ordinations were based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrices, which were calculated from square-root transformed abundance data. NMDS ordinations were calculated in Primer 6 using 999 re-runs. Permutational multivariate ANOVA (PERMA- NOVA) was carried out using a similar design as the univariate ANOVA to contrast multivariate invertebrate community structure between lake types (bloom vs bloom-free lakes, fixed factor), habitat (littoral, sublittoral, profundal, fixed factor) and time (study years, random factor). PERMANOVA was calculated on a Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrix of square-root transformed species data (9999 unrestricted permutations of raw data) using PERMANOVA v1.6 (Anderson, 2005), and significance was assessed using Monte Carlo asymptotic P values. Similarity Percentages (SIMPER), using a 90% cut-off level that the program sets by default, were calculated in Primer to determine invertebrate taxa contributions to community differences.To quantify and statistically compare beta diversity in bloom and bloom-free lakes, we employed a test of differences in multivariate dispersion of invertebrate community structure across habitat types of bloom and bloom-free lakes (Anderson et al., 2006). Under the null hypothesis of no faunal homogenisa- tion or differentiation the average distance of each habitat sample in multivariate space, defined by a principal coordinate analyses based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity, relative to the group (i.e., habitat) centroid should not differ. Statistical significance is determined by a permutation test (n = 999) for homogeneity of multivariate dispersions among the samples. Because of the low sample size (n = 3 bloom-free, n = 3 bloom lakes) for each habitat, the analyses of multivariate dispersion were carried out using the temporal replicates for each habitat after having confirmed by means of a time series analyses that no temporal autocorrelation existed (i.e., a time for space substitution). Using the Box–Ljung statistic (Ljung and Box, 1978), no temporal autocorrelation of multivariate community structure (NMDS dimension scores) was found in any of six study lakes for sublittoral and profundal assemblages (sublittoral: NMDS 1: Box–Ljung statistic 0–5.0, P > 0.05; NMDS 2: Box–Ljung 0.02–4.73; P > 0.05; profundal: NMDS 1: Box–Ljung statistic 0.03–4.79, P > 0.05; NMDS 2: Box– Ljung 0.01–7.68, P > 0.05). In the littoral, lakes Fra ̈ cksjo ̈ n (NMDS 1: Box–Ljung 5.95–8.28), Rotehogstja ̈ rnen (NMDS 1: Box–Ljung 4.33– 6.38; NMDS 2: Box–Ljung 3.08–10.25) and A ̈ lgsjo ̈ n (NMDS 1: Box– Ljung 5.16–7.35) showed significant temporal autocorrelation (P < 0.05), and a temporal average from these lakes was therefore used in the analysis. This ensured that only temporally indepen- dent variables were included in the analyses of beta diversity (sublittoral and profundal: n = 18 for each lake type; littoral: n = 8, bloom-free lakes; n = 13 bloom lakes), while assuring that a representative sample number was available for analyses. Multivariate dispersion was calculated in R 2.10.1 (R Development Core Team, 2009) using the betadisper and permutest functions implemented in the vegan package (Oksanen et al., 2010).

 xresults 
3.1. Blooming patterns in bloom lakesThe three bloom lakes showed different patterns of bloom formation and duration over the study period (Fig. 1). Blooms developed between summer and autumn but had collapsed by the time invertebrate samples were collected in October/November. The highest biovolume values were found in lake A ̈ lgsjo ̈ n in 1999, 2002 and 2004 (>11 mm3 L 1). In lake Gysla ̈ ttasjo ̈ n, peak biovolume formations (>8 mm3 L 1) occurred in 2002, 2003 and 2004. In lake Rotehogstja ̈rnen, biovolume peaks did not exceed 4 mm3 L 1 over the study period.3.2. Univariate community metricsThe rm-ANOVA showed that all invertebrate metrics, except total abundance, differed across lake habitats, and that the term ‘‘habitat’’ explained between 21% and 98% of between-sample variation (Table 2). Taxon richness and the Simpson index were highest in the littoral, followed by the sublittoral and profundal habitat (Tukey HSD test: littoral > sublittoral > profundal; P < 0.05; Fig. 2). Community evenness was higher in littoral and sublittoral habitats compared with profundal habitats types (Tukey HSD test: littoral = sublittoral > profundal; P < 0.05; Fig. 2). Bloom and bloom-free lakes differed significantly in total invertebrate abundance, evenness, and Simpson diversity, but not taxon richness patterns, resulting in a significant lake type effect in the rm-ANOVA that explained between 11% and 62% of the between-sample variation in the model (Table 2). Total abundance was higher in bloom lakes, while evenness and Simpson diversity were higher in bloom-free lakes (Fig. 2).Contrasting these metrics across habitats between lake types resulted in a significant lake type   habitat interactions for all metrics (marginal significance (P = 0.064) for the evenness index), reflecting that the magnitude of alteration of community structure varies with habitat in bloom lakes relative to bloom- free lakes. For instance, contrasting bloom and bloom-free lakes, many of the metrics were similar in the littoral but deviated substantially in sublittoral and profundal habitats (Fig. 2). This interaction term explained between 2% and 30% of the variation in the rm-ANOVA models (Table 2). None of the interaction terms with time were significant (Table 2), showing that the range of temporal variation of community metrics was similar across habitats in both lakes types.3.3. Multivariate community structureThe nonmetric multidimensional scaling analyses showed that the multivariate community structure differed between bloom and bloom-free lakes across habitats (Fig. 3), which was further supported by PERMANOVA, which indicates highly significant main and interaction effects (Table 3). Contrary to the ANOVAs, PERMANOVA also found highly significant effects of time, both as main effect and in the interaction terms, suggesting that invertebrate community structure is associated with the magni- tudes of blooms.Highly significant differences of community structure across habitats as a function of lake type could be explained by differences in the taxonomic structure across habitats between bloom and bloom-free lakes. The SIMPER analyses revealed a decreasing number of dominant species contributing to community structure at the 90% cut-off level from the littoral towards the profundal. In the littoral habitat, 41 and 38 species contributed to 90% of community structure, based on their abundances, in bloom-free and bloom lakes, respectively. The isopod Asellus aquaticus (L.) and the mayfly Leptophlebia vespertina (L.) were the numerically most abundant species in both lake types, although their percentage contribution was not high (8.03–13.5%; Table 4). The generally low percentage contributions, reflecting lower abundances, of the remaining taxa showed a similar share of taxa to community structure in bloom and bloom-free lakes (Table 4), which was also reflected in the evenness index (Fig. 2). In the sublittoral, 11 and 5 species explained 90% of the community structure in bloom-freeand bloom lakes, respectively. In the bloom-free lakes, the phantom midge Chaoborus flavicans (Meigen) (11%), the chirono- mids Procladius sp. (20%) and Sergentia coracina (Zetterstedt) (15%) were the most abundant species, while C. flavicans (62%) dominated in bloom lakes (Table 4). Similar patterns were found in the profundal habitat, with C. flavicans (48%), Procladius sp. (18%) and S. coracina (35%) dominating in bloom-free lakes, while profundal communities in bloom lakes consisted almost exclu- sively of C. flavicans (90%) (Table 4).3.4. Patterns of beta diversityEvaluating beta diversity in bloom and bloom-free lakes using a time for space substitution approach, the multivariate dispersion index revealed different patterns across habitats that are consistent with the spread of data points shown in the NMDS ordinations (Fig. 3). Again the results show that the magnitude of alteration of beta diversity was strongest in the profundal and weakest in the littoral of bloom relative to bloom-free lakes. In the littoral, bloom- free lakes had a higher beta diversity (mean Bray–Curtis distance to group centroid: 0.33) than bloom lakes (0.29) but this difference was not significant (mean square = 0.004, pseudo F1,18 = 0.91, P = 0.374, 999 permutations). By contrast, beta diversity was significantly lower in the sublittoral (0.39) of bloom compared to bloom-free lakes (0.48) (mean square = 0.06, pseudo F1,34 = 4, P = 0.05, 999 permutations). In the profundal habitats these differences were even more pronounced with bloom lakes having significantly lower beta diversity (0.19) compared to bloom-free lakes (0.50) (mean square = 0.88, pseudo F1,34 = 25, P = 0.001, 999 permutations).

xdiscussion
Range expansions and invasions of species are considered as the second major threat to biodiversity after habitat destruction (Simberloff et al., 2005), often resulting in altered species composi- tion, reduced diversity in, and taxonomic homogenisation of, native communities (Vitousek et al., 1997; Wilcove et al., 1998; Olden and Rooney, 2006). Because G. semen expands regionally across and forms undesired blooms in boreal lakes, we hypothesised that invertebrate diversity and community structure differed in bloom relative to bloom-free lakes (hypothesis 1). Not only did our results support this conjecture; more importantly, also our second hypothesis was supported because the magnitude of alteration of community structure and biodiversity in bloom relative to bloom- free lakes differed with habitat type. Littoral assemblages in bloom and bloom-free lakes shared similar alpha (taxon richness, evenness and Simpson diversity) and beta diversity characteristics, despite differing in multivariate community similarity. By contrast, alter- ation of assemblage structure was most severe in the profundal and manifested in reduced diversity and faunal homogenisation (i.e. decreased beta diversity) in bloom relative to bloom-free lakes. Only our third hypothesis was only partly supported because the effect of time was highly significant in the PERMANOVA but not in the univariate ANOVA models. These finding suggests that univariate metrics are more suitable to detect qualitative differences between lake types (i.e., whether or not blooms occur), while multivariate community structure is more sensitive to quantitative differences (temporal variability of bloom magnitudes).Because biological invasions and species range expansions have context-dependent effects on communities and ecosystems (Riccardi and Atkinson, 2004), ecologists and managers are challenged to determine the scale at which invasions affect biodiversity. Exotic species can reduce local (alpha) diversity (Gaertner et al., 2009; Vila` et al., 2011), but also beta diversity may be reduced resulting in regional biotic homogenisation of communities (Olden et al., 2008; Michelan et al., 2010). Our results show that alpha and beta diversity responds differently across habitats within a single ecosystem. These habitat-specific responses have important implications for the impact assessment of invasive species and the conservation of native biodiversity inlakes. The results clearly demonstrate the need to cover environmental heterogeneity within lakes to assess the full range of diversity response to species invasions. This has clearly applied implications, as management information and conservation schemes can be biased if impact is inferred from single-habitat surveys that may miss impact on either alpha or beta diversity. For instance, many studies use littoral invertebrates to infer human pressure on lakes (Donohue et al., 2009; Tolonen and Ha ̈ ma ̈ la ̈ inen, 2010; Wesolek et al., 2010), based on the rationale that littoral invertebrates hold a key position in matter and energy flux (Solimini et al., 2006). We acknowledge that different forms of human impact can lead to specific cross-habitat responses of diversity; however, our study provides a clear example of underestimation of impact using littoral communities alone. Other habitats should not be ignored in biological assessment to infer the full range of impact on lake biodiversity, especially those arising from species invasions, to provide optimised information for environmental management and policy (i.e. the European Water Framework Directive).Successful invasions are due to complexly interlinked evolu- tionary and ecological factors, including time lags or delays, non- linear patterns, chaos, complex dynamics and situation-specific factors (Williamson, 1999; Angeler et al., 2012), which complicate the determination of mechanisms underlying the impacts of invasive species on native communities (Thomson, 2005; Coleman and Levine, 2007; Maltez-Mouro et al., 2010). Although this study provided us with the opportunity to assess differences in invertebrate diversity between bloom and bloom-free lakes with high ecological realism, the elucidation of mechanisms is limited. These limitations are partly due to the design of monitoring programs where sampling effort must be balanced against funding opportunities (Downes et al., 2002), and this was also the case in our study. Invertebrates have been sampled in autumn after G. semen blooms have collapsed. Thus, with the current design the relative importance of direct ecological effects during blooms cannot be distinguished from those that may arise from lag effects (i.e., after blooms have collapsed).Arguably, our results could be confounded by other factors such as differences in water quality characteristics or the configuration of higher trophic levels between bloom and bloom-free lakes. Benthic invertebrates are sensitive to changes in water quality and therefore used as indicators in biomonitoring programs (Johnson et al., 1993). Also benthic invertebrate community structure is known to vary as a function of predation regimes in lakes (Diehl, 1992). However, we discard water quality as a confounding factor because both lake types were similar in their abiotic variables. Trigal et al. (2011) have reported similar findings using different sets of bloom and bloom-free lakes in their study. Regarding predation regimes, preliminary analyses have shown that perch (Perca fluviatilis L.) and roach (Rutilus rutilus L.) dominate the fish communities in both lake types, with a slightly higher abundance of the latter in bloom-free lakes. Also, the fish communities in bloom-free lakes had slightly higher evenness and diversity but the overall similarity in fish assemblage structure did not differ between lake types (Trigal et al., 2011). However, we are unable to assess the degree by which differences in fish communities confound bloom effects on invertebrate community structure in the present study.Our design permitted us to study community structure in lakes that suffer recurring blooms relative to others that do not, while precluding an assessment of direct bloom impacts. Despite this limitation, we believe that the observation of patterns instead of mechanisms in this study can be useful for informing species invasion ecology and management (Allen et al., 2011). Given that G. semen will likely further spread, and form blooms, across the boreal waterscape, our results provide important information on likely biodiversity change resulting from these invasions at broader spatial scales, and are therefore relevant from a conservation biogeography perspective.The analyses of taxonomic structure of bloom and bloom-free lakes helped explain the patterns of increasing decline ofbiodiversity and faunal homogenisation from littoral towards profundal habitats. This could be attributed to a higher abundance of the predatory phantom midge, C. flavicans, which was especially pronounced in the profundal. Similar findings were reported in other lakes that suffer recurring bloom impacts of G. semen (Trigal et al., 2011; K. Johansson, C. Trigal, T. Vrede, R.K. Johnson, unpublished manuscript). This congruence of Chaoborus increase in the profundal of bloom lakes found in different studies suggest that the time for space substitution in our analysis of beta diversity may not unduly influence inference. The dominance of Chaoborus in sublittoral and profundal habitats is surprising because it would be expected that detritivorous taxa numerically increase due to the accumulation of food resources after blooms have collapsed. Other indirect ecological factors like changes in trophic relationships rather than direct resource effects seem responsible for the observed taxonomic changes in community structure (Trigal et al., 2011). Indeed, the dominance of Chaoborus suggests complex food web interactions whereby predation of Chaoborus on zooplankton might reduce the grazer control of Gonyostomum in bloom lakes, even though these effects are strongly contingent on zooplankton community structure (Lebret et al., 2012) and the recruitment patterns of Gonyostomum from resting stages in lakes sediments in the presence of zooplankters (Hansson, 2000). However, these trophic interactions and likely other mechanisms cannot be evaluated with the current data set. Notwithstanding, the observed taxonomic patterns that were associated with diversity decrease and faunal homogenisation suggest important functional con- sequences for lakes. Not only is benthic secondary productivity increased in bloom lakes (Trigal et al., 2011); more importantly, the dominance of a few species in profundal and sublittoral habitats suggest that functional redundancy and response diversity (Elmqvist et al., 2003) can be decreased and the overall resilience reduced in bloom lakes, likely increasing their susceptibility to environmental disturbance.