xabstract
Aquatic ecosystems are experiencing increasing disturbance from multiple stressors caused by anthropogenic activities. The potential for multiple stressors to modify each others’ impacts is not well understood. Legislation such as the EU Water Frame- work Directive (WFD) requires the development of tools to assess human impacts in aquatic systems that incorporate ecological elements, such as macroinver- tebrates. Nutrient enrichment and invasive species are major threats to freshwater systems. The invasive zebra mussel Dreissena polymorpha is a conspicuous invader in freshwater aquatic systems in Europe and North America, and has been linked to drastic changes in macroinvertebrate communities and lake ecology. In 31 lake sites varying in nutrient pressure and in the presence or absence of D. polymorpha we tested three ecological quality assessment tools based on macroinvertebrate assemblages (% Sensitive Taxa to Total Phosphorus (TP), TP Score and Indicator Taxa Metric) and two basic ecological metrics. There were highly significant changes in macroinvertebrate diver- sity, structure, and composition associated with the invasion by D. polymorpha. While the three metrics performed consistently well in non-invaded systems, they lost explanatory power for eutrophication pres- sure in invaded systems. Our results suggest that metrics may need to be developed separately for invaded and non-invaded systems, and that the interaction between alien species and nutrient enrich- ment requires further investigation.

xintroduction
The magnitude and intensity of anthropogenic stress- ors impacting aquatic ecosystems is generally increas- ing (Vitousek et al., 1997; Sala et al., 2000). Most ecosystems are not impacted by a single stressor, but by multiple stressors acting simultaneously (Strayer, 2010). While the effects of individual stressors at the species and ecosystems level have received considerable attention, there is still a lack of under- standing of their combined effects (Ormerod et al., 2010). The action of one stressor has potential to modify the impacts of another through additive, antagonistic or synergistic effects (Darling & Cote, 2008).
Tools for assessing and monitoring human impacts on aquatic systems are currently in development in many parts of the world. In Europe, this process is driven by the EU Water Framework Directive (WFD, EC, 2000). The Directive requires that tools to assess the quality of aquatic systems must incorporate ecological elements, including metrics based on benthic invertebrates (see also, Federal Water Pollu- tion Control Act, 1972). These animals are involved in key processes such as food web dynamics, productivity, nutrient cycling, and decomposition (Reice & Wohlenberg, 1993), forming an important link between primary producers, detrital deposits, and higher trophic levels (Stoffels et al., 2005). Changes in environmental conditions in lakes are often reflected in changes in macroinvertebrate assem- blages (Johnson et al., 1993).
Most assessment tools for aquatic systems have been developed with a focus on the inputs of nutrient pollution, an environmental stressor of major concern in aquatic systems globally (Mayer et al., 2002; Solimini et al., 2006). Nutrient enrichment can have a range of effects, including marked alterations of invertebrate community composition and structure. Significant associations between nutrient pressures and lake littoral invertebrate assemblage structure have been found previously (Blumenshine et al., 1997; Brodersen et al., 1998; Tolonen et al., 2005; Brauns et al., 2007). For example Blumenshine et al. (1997) found significant changes in the structure and composition of macroinvertebrate assemblages of hard-bottom habitats, and altered size–frequency distributions of some insects. The nature of the response of littoral macroinvertebrate assemblages to nutrient enrichment has, however, been shown to be habitat-dependent (Tolonen et al., 2005; Brauns et al., 2007), with the most marked effects found on stony substrata (Tolonen et al., 2005; Donohue et al., 2009).
The invasive zebra mussel Dreissena polymorpha (Pallas, 1771) is one of the most aggressive invaders of lakes in Europe and North America, and has spread rapidly through Europe over the last decade (Kara- tayev et al., 2002; Minchin et al., 2002). It is believed that the zebra mussels were first introduced in Ireland in 1994 in the lower Shannon estuary and rapidly colonized Irish lakes (McCarthy et al., 1998). The mussel functions as an ecosystem engineer by altering the flow of organic matter and light, and providing structurally complex habitat for other species to inhabit and seek refuge from predators (Ricciardi et al., 1997; Mayer et al., 2002). By feeding on large amounts of phytoplankton, zebra mussels reduce the chlorophyll a:TP ratio, leading to increased water clarity and greatly enhanced benthic– pelagic coupling. The associated enhanced filtering activity results in increased transfer of ecosystem energy from the plankton to the benthos, by depos- iting faeces and pseudofaeces on the bottom (Fahn- enstiel et al., 1995; Zhu et al., 2006). Increased water transparency allowing light penetration to deeper depths can promote the growth of macrophytes (Skubinna et al., 1995) and epilithic algae (Lowe & Pillsbury, 1995). Zebra mussel invasion has been also associated with increased benthic macroinvertebrate abundance and species richness, decreased commu- nity evenness (Ricciardi et al., 1997; Ward & Ricciardi, 2007), and negative effects on the abun- dance of filter feeders or some burrowing organisms (Ricciardi et al., 1997; Ward & Ricciardi, 2007). It, therefore, has strong potential to modify impacts of nutrient pollution in freshwater systems, by changing both community structure and key ecosystem pro- cesses (Lucy et al., 2005; Millane et al., 2008).
Understanding the response of littoral macroinver- tebrates to increased nutrient loads with and without the confounding effect of zebra mussels is essential for classifying lakes under the WFD. The need to develop cost-effective and reliable indicators that correlate well with measures of eutrophication inde- pendently of, and in combination with, biological invasions, is self evident.
While assessment tools using macroinvertebrates to assess the ecological quality of rivers exist in many European countries (Wright et al., 1998), Estonia currently has the only working assessment system for lakes based on littoral macroinvertebrate communi- ties (Ha ̊kanson, 2001; Solimini et al., 2006). Donohue et al. (2009) recently developed three biometrics that relate littoral benthic macroinvertebrate community structure of Irish lakes to eutrophication pressure, namely % Sensitive Taxa to Total Phosphorus (TP), a TP Score and an Indicator Taxa Metric. Metrics were based on species TP optima estimated from data collated from 190 Irish lakes using Canonical Correspondence Analysis (Dodkins et al., 2005), with testing and validation on an independent data set of 45 lakes sampled both in April and August 2005, and spanning a matrix of alkalinity and TP concentra- tions. The final model based on the suite of three metrics provided statistically significant results with a predictive power for stony substrates ranging from 0.27 (P = 0.048) to 0.54 (P = 0.002) on each of three sets of 15 lakes grouped by alkalinity (Donohue et al., 2009). Although the original model included lakes containing D. polymorpha, further testing across a large range of lakes, and especially those subject to multiple pressures including invasive alien species, is required.
In this study, the three metrics proposed by Donohue et al. (2009) in addition to two basic ecological metrics were tested specifically in relation to the combined effect of nutrient enrichment and the presence of D. polymorpha on benthic macroinverte- brates across a range of moderate alkaline lakes across the west and midlands of Ireland. The main objective
was to examine the extent to which an additional stressor, in this case an invasive species, can modify the effectiveness of monitoring tools designed pri- marily to detect impacts of a different stressor, in this case nutrient enrichment. Given that the most marked effects of nutrient enrichment on macroinvertebrates community structure and diversity have been found on stony substrata (Tolonen et al., 2005), and that zebra mussels are primarily found on hard substrata, this study focussed on these habitats.

xmethods
Study sites
Littoral macroinvertebrates inhabiting hard substrata comprising a mixture of pebbles, gravel and bed rock were sampled at one site in each of 31 medium to high alkalinity lakes ([0.2 meq l-1) in the centre and west of Ireland during spring 2007 (Fig. 1; Table 1). Lakes were selected from estimations of total phos- phorus (TP) and the scheme proposed by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Devel- opment (OECD, 1982) and the Irish Environmental Protection Agency (Toner et al., 2005) so as to represent a range of trophic states. Long term TP data were obtained from the North–South Share River Basin Management Project (www.nsshare.com) pro-
vided by I. Donohue (pers. comm.). Subsurface water samples were collected from both open water samples and near shore using a bottle thrown from the shore, hence avoiding littoral sediment disturbance, during spring and summer seasons. The number of occasions on which TP was sampled varied for each lake, but on average there were 14 sampling dates per lake between 1996 and 2004. The average TP value for the period was used in the statistical analyses. Lakes also differed as to whether or not they have been invaded by the zebra mussel D. polymorpha. Invasion status was determined a priori through a desk study and extensive consultation drawing on local and national knowledge. Preliminary in situ direct visual inspec- tion of each site was conducted with the aid of a bathyscope at a depth of *0.5 m by using five rep- licated 0.25 m2 quadrats randomly placed along five 50 m transects perpendicular to the shore line. The invasion status was later confirmed by presence of the D. polymorpha in the samples. To ensure a clear distinction between invaded and non-invaded lakes in our comparisons, sites were considered as invaded when[5 individual zebra mussels were found in each replicate sample and non-invaded when no zebra mussels were found in the samples. Sites that fell between these criteria (i.e., sites with one-5 individ- ual zebra mussels per site) were not included in the analyses (4 sites fell into this category). It is not possible to be certain whether ‘‘non-invaded’’ lakes might contain D. polymorpha in another location within the lake. Therefore, invaded and non-invaded lakes were defined by observation of the presence or absence of the zebra mussels in the vicinity of sam- pling sites (across a minimum range of approximately 1 km). Given the generally small size of Irish lakes, this provides a reasonable test of invasion status. Although, in most cases non-invaded sites were within water bodies considered substantially free of zebra mussels based on the desktop study. In total, 20 invaded sites and 11 non-invaded sites were recognized.
Sampling
All sites were sampled for littoral macroinvertebrates during spring 2007. Triplicate 1-min kick samples were obtained in *0.5 m of water depth using a standard Freshwater Biological Association type pond net of 1 mm mesh size. All macroinvertebrates were removed from all substrata caught in the net. Samples were preserved on site in 70% alcohol and subsequently sorted and identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level, typically species.
Statistical analyses
All analyses were completed using data at the level of individual sites, with abundances of macroinverte- brates summed across the three replicate kick sam- ples to avoid pseudoreplication. Three metrics to assess the ecological status of lakes were calculated: % Sensitivity to TP, TP Score, and Indicator Taxa Metric (Donohue et al., 2009).
The % Sensitivity to TP, represents the general affinity of taxa either to lakes with low water column TP concentrations (i.e., scoring 1) or those without such affinity (i.e., scoring 0, Table 2). The sensitivity to TP scores are summed for each taxon found in a sample, then multiplied by 100 and divided by the number of taxa found; thus, calculating the percent- age of taxa in the sample that are sensitive to TP (Donohue et al., 2009).
TP Scores, ranging from 1 to 5, correspond to the ecological optimum for each taxon along a TP gradient. Taxa showing strong affinity for lakes with high water column TP concentrations score 5, and taxa showing strong affinity for oligotrophic condi- tions score 1 (Table 2). Taxa found in a sample that have not been given a TP optimum were not included in the calculation of the TP Score. TP optimum values for each taxon found in the sample are added and then divided by the number of taxa to calculate the TP Score for the sample (Donohue et al., 2009).
The Indicator Taxa Metric is calculated using species optima derived from Canonical Correspon- dence Analysis (CCA) for the five most common taxa and found in[25% of samples collected by Donohue et al. (2009), that showed the strongest affinity for high water column TP concentrations (i.e., highest CCA species optima for TP). These, together with the five common taxa with the most negative optima for TP, were combined to form the Indicator Taxa Metric (Table 3). Optimum values were summed for each of the indicator taxa found in the sample to obtain the Indicator Taxa Metric score for the sample.
Additionally, two other basic ecological metrics (number of taxa and total abundance) were calculated
for each of the samples. Each of the five metrics were analysed using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with invasion as a main effect (fixed, two levels) and TP as a covariate. Levene’s test was used to check the assumption of homogeneity of variances, and the assumption of normality was checked by visual inspection of the residual plots. Total abundance and TP were log10 transformed to meet these assumptions. The homogeneity of slopes test was run before ANCOVA (Zar, 1999).
Differences in community structure between invaded and non-invaded sites were visualized with non-metric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) on the basis of Bray-Curtis similarities of untransformed data. Similarity Percentage Analysis (SIMPER, Clarke, 1993) was used to identify the percentage contribution of each species (or taxon) to the observed differences between assemblages of the invaded and non-invaded sites. The ratio Diss/SD (ratio of the contribution to dissimilarity divided by the standard deviation of the contribution to dissim- ilarity among groups) was used to indicate the consistency with which a given species contributed to the average dissimilarity between samples from invaded and non-invaded sites. Values C1 indicated a high degree of consistency.
In order to assess the association between invasion and total phosphorus concentrations on multivariate community structure, distance-based permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was used (Anderson, 2001; McArdle & Anderson, 2001) based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarities of the untransformed and presence/absence transformed data. Invasion was included as a fixed factor and total phosphorus as a covariable. The community analyses were done having first removed data on the abundance of D. polymorpha. All analyses were performed using the computer software PRIMER 6 & PERMANOVA (Clarke, 1993; Anderson & Gorley, 2007).

xresults
Metrics
The % Sensitivity to TP metric was significantly and negatively correlated with TP only for non-invaded sites (Fig. 2a, r2 = 0.24, P \ 0.05). At invaded sites % Sensitivity to TP was not significantly correlated with TP (P [ 0.05). The test for homogeneity of slopes revealed differences in the slopes (Invasion 9 TP, F1,27 = 4.52, P \ 0.05), confirming differences in the nature of the relationship. TP Score and Indicator Taxa Metric were positively and significantly correlated to TP only at non-invaded sites (r2 = 0.37 and 0.71, respectively, Fig. 2b, c). Again, the test for homoge- neity of slopes revealed differences in the slopes between invaded and non-invaded sites for both metrics (Invasion 9 TP, F1,27 = 4.73 and 5.51, respectively, P \ 0.05). The slopes of the regressions between mean number of taxa and TP did not differ significantly between invaded and non-invaded lakes (Fig. 3a, test for homogeneity of slopes: Invasion 9 TP, F1,27, = 0.22, P [ 0.05) and the ANCOVA test detected a significant effect of invasion (F1,28 = 10.81, P \ 0.01), with invaded sites showing a significant increase in mean number of taxa from 27.1 to 36.4 (Fig. 4a). Similarly, the slopes of the regres- sions between total abundance and TP did not vary significantly with invasion status (Fig. 3b, test for homogeneity of slopes: Invasion 9 TP, F1, 27 = 0.65, P [ 0.05). The ANCOVA test detected a highly sig- nificant effect of invasion (F1,28 = 12.63, P \ 0.01),
in which invaded lakes had significantly higher total abundance of invertebrates compared with non- invaded sites (Fig. 4b).
Community structure
Overall 131 macroinvertebrate taxa were identified. Trichoptera (caddisflies) and Coleoptera (beetles) were the most diverse orders of invertebrates encoun- tered with 30 and 24 taxa, respectively. Mollusca (snails, bivalves and limpets) were the next most diverse group with 18 taxa, followed by Acari (mites) with 17 taxa. Overall, Ephemeroptera (mayflies) was the most abundant group, comprising [30% of the total abundance of invertebrates across the data set, while the waterlouse Asellus aquaticus (Linnaeus, 1758) comprised 25% of the invertebrates. Worms (Oligochaeta) were not identified to a lower taxo- nomic resolution owing to time constraints, this is why they contribute little to the taxonomic richness, even though they made up 7% of the total abundance of invertebrates.
PERMANOVA analysis showed highly signifi- cant changes in invertebrate assemblage structure owing to the invasion of zebra mussels compared with non-invaded sites (P \ 0.001, Table 4; Fig. 5). This pattern was true for the untransformed and presence/absence transformed data, indicating that differences were owing both to differences in the relative abundances of taxa and the composition of the assemblages in invaded and non-invaded sites.
Six taxa contributed almost 80% of the observed differences in the community structure between invaded and non-invaded sites. All these taxa were more abundant in invaded sites (Table 5). A. aquat- icus and the mayfly Caenis luctuosa (Burmeister, 1839) contributed over 58% to the observed differ- ences. Compositional changes in the assemblages between invaded and non-invaded were attributable to 11 taxa that were present only in invaded sites, and one (Caenis macrura, Stephens, 1835) that was found only in non-invaded sites (Table 6).
The effect of TP on the macroinvertebrate com- munity structure was almost significant (P = 0.07, Table 4), but this trend was not evident when the analysis was run on the presence/absence transformed data, indicating that the effect was only related to changes in relative abundance, rather than in composition.

xdiscussion
Nutrient enrichment and invasive species pose major threats to the natural diversity and functioning of aquatic systems (Solimini et al., 2006; Ormerod et al., 2010). The simultaneous occurrence of multiple stressors has generated a major challenge to deter- mine their independent and combined effects and to assess the ecological quality of the systems where
they occur (Darling & Cote, 2008). Furthermore, there is a potential for complex interactions of multiple stressors acting simultaneously resulting in serious alteration in the ecology and the assessment of the status of aquatics systems. Here, it was demonstrated that the performance of metrics devel- oped to assess eutrophication pressure in lakes was strongly affected by the invasion by D. polymorpha. All three metrics based on littoral macroinvertebrates (% Sensitivity to TP, TP score, and Indicator Taxa Metric) were correlated significantly with concentra- tions of TP in the water column in non-invaded systems, but not in invaded systems. Considering the widespread distribution and high rate of colonization of D. polymorpha in European freshwaters, these results highlight a need to consider further the effect that D. polymorpha, and other invasive aliens, might have on lake ecosystems and their classification under the WFD (Lucy et al., 2005; Irvine, 2009; Mayes & Codling, 2009).
It is not unreasonable to attribute the loss of predictive power of the three tested classification metrics to the invasion of D. polymorpha rather than co-varying factors. The significant shift in inverte- brate community structure between invaded and non- invaded systems was associated with increases in the abundance of six taxa in invaded sites. These included taxa with strong affinity for lakes with high water column TP concentrations, such as Asellus aquaticus, Caenis luctuosa, and Pisidium/Sphaerium spp. The positive effect, accentuating the response to nutrient enrichment, on the abundance of these taxa associated with D. polymorpha has been previously documented, although a negative effect on the abundance of Pisidium/Sphaerium spp. has been generally reported (reviewed by Ward & Ricciardi, 2007; Millane et al., 2008). The abundance of the invasive amphipod Crangonyx pseudogracilis was also positively related to the invasion of zebra mussels. Although, occurring in both invaded and non-invaded lakes, the abundance of this alien species was on average three times higher on invaded sites. Positive and potentially synergistic interactions among invasive species may lead to accelerated impacts on native ecosystems (Simberloff & Von Holle, 1999; Ricciardi, 2001).
The overall change in the assemblage structure, specifically the increase in invertebrate abundance and number of taxa are effects generally associated with the introduction of zebra mussels (Ricciardi et al., 1997; Sousa et al., 2009). Possible explanations for these changes relate to the ability of D. polymor- pha, as with other ecosystem engineers, to modify the availability of resources for other species by building and modifying habitats. Benthic macroinvertebrate taxa respond specifically to the physically complex structure provided by aggregates of mussel shells (Botts et al., 2006). Zebra mussels also change nutrient availability in littoral habitats by deposition of faeces and pseudofaeces, with strong positive effects on the abundance of scrapers and deposit feeder species, such as Asellus aquaticus and Caenis luctuosa (Mayer et al., 2002; Haynes et al., 2005). This increase of benthic macroinvertebrates abun- dance can be explained by the enormous filtering capacity of the invasive mussel resulting in a shift of ecosystem energy from the plankton to the benthos (Fahnenstiel et al., 1995; Zhu et al., 2006). The effects of D. polymorpha can also vary with sediment characteristics, such as slope and particle size; with more pronounced effects in habitats with lower slope and finer particle size, where generally there is less shelter available for macroinvertebrates (Jones & Ricciardi, 2005).
This study found a trend for increased macroinver- tebrate abundance with increased TP concentrations, both in invaded and non-invaded sites, although these relationships were not significant. Similarly, there was a pattern of changes in assemblage structure associ- ated with a gradient in TP concentration. This observed pattern is concomitant with previous studies were positive relationships between nutrient pressure and littoral invertebrate assemblage structure and abundance have been found both in hard and soft substrata (Blumenshine et al., 1997; Brodersen et al., 1998; Tolonen et al., 2005; Brauns et al., 2007; Donohue et al., 2009).
Among the three tested metrics, the Indicator Taxa Metric best predicted concentrations of TP in non- invaded systems. The high predictive power (r2 = 0.71) strongly suggests littoral macroinverte- brates sampled from hard substrata can provide a robust indication of nutrient pressures in lakes, despite high inherent spatio-temporal variability (White & Irvine, 2003; Stoffels et al., 2005; Brauns et al., 2007). The two other metrics tested (TP score and % Sensitivity Taxa) had lower predictive power, with 31 to 37% of the variation in the metrics related to changes in phosphorus load.
Even though the study was focused on a specific lake type and habitat, there is inevitably natural spatial variation in assemblages owing to abiotic and biotic characteristics of lakes (White & Irvine, 2003; Brauns et al., 2007). While another potential limita- tion of the study was that invertebrate sampling was done only once and in shallow waters, during spring, this occurred at a time of maximum abundance and species richness in many lakes (White & Irvine, 2003), and has been recommended as a suitable time
for biodiversity assessment in freshwater systems when extensive seasonal sampling is not possible (Toner et al., 2005; Donohue et al., 2009).
One of the fundamental principles of ecological status classification under the WFD is the identifica- tion of type specific reference conditions (EC, 2000). Considering the extent of the ecological alterations associated with D. polymorpha invasions reported here and elsewhere, the identification of reference and ecological quality classes to assess the impacts of nutrient pressure in lakes should require potential impacts of alien invasive species to be taken in consideration in setting class boundaries (Olenin et al., 2007). Under the WFD, impacts on lakes are measured as deviations from reference conditions (e.g., Ecological Quality Ratio), which should take account of changes caused by all pressures. This includes impact from alien invasive, and type specific reference conditions need to consider to potential of any invasive to impact on an ecological reference state. Furthermore it is not clear how effects of alien invasive species interact with other pressures across successive classification boundaries. Assessing the ecological status of lakes affected by multiple stressors remains a major challenge.
