xabstract

Although numerous studies have investigated
the impacts of common carp (Cyprinus carpio)
on aquatic ecosystems, the effects of this species on
nutrient cycling, water clarity, and vegetation density
have rarely been addressed in whole lakes, especially
in those that stratify. In this study, we documented
changes in total phosphorus, water clarity, and aquatic
vegetation density in a stratified eutrophic lake while
we reduced carp biomass from 300 to 40 kg/ha. Carp
removal was associated with an increase in vegetation
density, an increase in springtime water clarity, a
decline in early season chlorophyll a, and a decline in
total suspended solids. However, neither clarity nor
chlorophyll a improved during the summer months.
Carp removal also had no apparent effect on total
phosphorus, which increased rapidly in the summer
both before and after carp removal, and was seemingly
driven by abiotic internal loading. The lack of a
decline in phosphorus following carp removal
suggests that despite their high biomass, carp may
sometimes play a relatively minor role in nutrient
transport from benthic sediments in stratified eutrophic
lakes. Their removal is nonetheless beneficial for
improving water clarity and restoring macrophyte
communities in such systems.

xintroduction

The common carp (Cyprinus carpio or ‘‘carp’’) is one
of the world’s most invasive fish (Kulhanek et al.,
2011). It is often called an ‘‘ecological engineer’’
because of its ability to modify the habitat and biotic
communities of the lakes it invades (Matsuzaki et al.,
2009). Carp root in the bottom while searching for
food and have been shown to drive rapid declines in
aquatic vegetation and increases in water turbidity
(Lougheed et al., 1998; Zambrano et al., 2001; Bajer
et al., 2009; Matsuzaki et al., 2009). The carp has also
been hypothesized to play an important role in nutrient
transport from the sediments into the water column
due to bioturbation and excretion (Lamarra Jr., 1975;
Breukelaar et al., 1994; Parkos III et al., 2003; Morgan
& Hicks, 2013). For all of these reasons, carp removal
is often recommended as an important element of lake
restoration (Meijer et al., 1990). However, although
the effects of carp on lakes have been investigated in
over 50 studies, some aspects of carp in lake ecology
remain unclear. In particular, it is not clear what the
precise effects of carp are on nutrient cycling and
water clarity in whole lakes as most studies have used
relatively small experimental arenas or theoretical
calculations (Weber & Brown, 2009; Morgan &
Hicks, 2013). The effects of carp on nutrients and
water clarity are particularly poorly documented in
thermally stratified lakes.
Although small-scale experiments have shown that
carp usually cause an overall increase in nutrient
concentrations in ponds or enclosures (Lamarra, 1975;
Breukelaar et al., 1994; Parkos et al., 2003; Chumchal
& Drenner, 2004; Morgan & Hicks, 2013), whole-lake
experiments have shown mixed results. For example,
some carp exclusion efforts in shallow lakes have
shown only subtle or nonexistent effects on total
phosphorus (Meijer et al., 1990; Thomasen & Chow-
Fraser, 2011). Further, while declines in phosphorous
have been documented in other lakes from which carp
have been removed (Schrage&Downing, 2004), these
studies used piscicides so the observed declines might
have been attributable to a loss of fish in general, not
just carp. Several small-scale experiments have also
shown inconsistent relationships between carp biomass
and nutrient concentrations (Lougheed et al.,
1998; Matsuzaki et al., 2007, 2009). Together, these
inconsistencies suggest that the effects of carp on
whole-lake nutrient cycling might be more complex
than presently realized.
Almost all studies that have investigated the effects
of carp have focused on shallow lakes (reviewed in
Weber & Brown, 2009); i.e., lakes that rarely stratify
and can be largely colonized by aquatic vegetation
(Scheffer, 2005). However, carp can also be abundant
in deeper, thermally stratified systems in which their
presence is often associated with poor water clarity
and high nutrient concentrations (O’Donnell, 1943;
Ten Winkel & Meulemans, 1984; Jackson et al., 2010;
Weber & Brown, 2011). To what extent carp drive
water clarity and nutrient concentrations in such
systems is poorly documented. Nutrient cycling in
stratified lakes often is strongly affected by abiotic
‘‘internal loading’’ in which large quantities of phosphorus
are released from sediments during hypolimnetic
hypoxia in the summer (Liboriussen et al., 2009;
Nu¨rnberg, 2009), leading to epilimnetic phosphorus
spikes as a consequence of thermocline erosion. While
internal loading might play an important role in
nutrient cycling in stratified lakes, carp may substantially
accelerate phosphorus transport from benthic
sediments into the water column of such systems via
excretion (Morgan & Hicks, 2013) and bioturbation
(Zambrano et al., 2001). One might, therefore, expect
elevated phosphorus concentrations and more severe
algal blooms in stratified lakes with large carp
populations as compared to lakes that lack carp.
Stratified lakes with abundant carp are also likely to
suffer from poor aquatic vegetation communities and
increased loads of suspended sediments.
In this study, we selectively removed common carp
from a stratified (polymictic), eutrophic lake in the
North American Midwest to address the role of carp in
water clarity, nutrient cycling, and vegetation density
in such lakes. We reduced the biomass of carp from
approximately 300 kg/ha to approximately 40 kg/ha
using winter seining, while measuring changes in
percent cover of aquatic vegetation, water clarity
(Secchi depth), total phosphorus (TP), chlorophyll
a (ChlA), and total suspended solids (TSS). We also
collected information on thermocline stability and
internal phosphorus loading to better explain the
concentrations and seasonal TP patterns before and
after carp removal. Additionally, changes in the native
fish community were monitored. This study is relevant
to the restoration of stratified lakes as well as to our
understanding of the role of carp in nutrient cycling.

xmethods

Study site
This study was conducted in Lake Susan, a small
(35.1 ha), hyper-eutrophic (summer TP[100 lg/L)
lake in central Minnesota, USA, which appears to be
representative of many lakes in this region. In spite of
its shallow depth (max. depth 5.1 m), Lake Susan
stratifies in early summer and hypolimnetic waters
with dissolved oxygen concentrations of less than
0.1 mg/L cover approximately 50% of its bottom
during July and August. Partial thermocline erosion
occurs on windy days, but the lake does not mix to the
bottom until autumn. At the beginning of this study,
the lake contained a large population of common
carp whose biomass exceeded 300 kg/ha (Bajer &
Sorensen, 2010). Radio telemetry showed that carp in
this lake tend to occupy the littoral zone during the
summer (Bajer et al., 2010; Bajer & Sorensen, 2010).
The native fish community was dominated by several
species of centrarchids including bluegill (Lepomis
macrochirus), black crappie (Pomoxis nigromaculatus),
and largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides).
Lake Susan is located in an urban setting and has
historically suffered from high phosphorus concentrations,
poor water clarity, and a poor aquatic plant
community. Sediment cores showed high rates of
internal phosphorous release, and alum was applied in
1998 to remediate these conditions, but it was underdosed
and failed to reduce internal phosphorus loading
or improve water clarity (Huser, 2012).
Experimental design
The abundance and biomass of carp in Lake Susan
were estimated in 2008 (Bajer & Sorensen, 2010) at
which time we also collected baseline (pre-removal)
data on aquatic vegetation, Secchi, TP, ChlA, TSS, and
native fish abundance. In addition, we retrieved two
additional years of historical data (2004, 2005) on
Secchi depth, TP, and ChlA collected by the local
watershed district to better portray conditions in the
lake prior to carp removal. Most carp were removed
from the lake in March 2009 (see below), while our
measurements of aquatic vegetation density, water
quality, nutrients, and native fish continued for three
additional years (2009–2011).
Carp biomass estimates and removal
Carp abundance and biomass were estimated in the
summer of 2008 using mark-and-recapture analyses
(Bajer & Sorensen, 2010) (Table 1). A large number
of adult carp (approximately 80% of the population)
were removed from the lake in March of 2009 using
telemetry-guided seining under the ice that targeted
carp aggregations (Table 1; Bajer et al., 2011). No
other fishes were removed at that time. Approximately,
300 carp were also removed in the spring of
2010. Carp removed from the lake were subtracted
from the initial population to generate post-removal
estimates. We adjusted these post-removal estimates
for natural mortality that we estimated to be 10% using
the survival of radio-tagged carp in the lake. The lake
inlet and outlet were blocked during the study to
eliminate emigration and immigration. Finally, the
lake was sampled annually to account for possible carp
recruitment (no recruitment occurred throughout the
study; Bajer et al., 2012).
Aquatic vegetation
Aquatic vegetation (both submersed and floating-leaf)
was sampled annually during 2008–2011 in June (time
of peak abundance) following procedures similar to
those of Schrage & Downing (2004). Twenty transects
distributed approximately equidistantly from each
other were mapped in the lake using ArcGIS. These
transects were perpendicular to the shoreline, and
vegetation was sampled at locations with water depths
of 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 m along each transect (the
vegetation was generally not visible at depths[2 m).
At each sampling location, visual estimates of percent
vegetative cover (nearest 10%) were recorded within a
2 9 2 m area using the front of the boat (2 m long) as
a reference. To confirm that our visual estimates were
unbiased, a sampling rake was lowered to the bottom
at every other transect, twisted three times, and the
vegetation was pulled on the boat and weighed
(nearest 10 g); we observed a linear relationship
between visual estimates and rake biomass
(P\0.001). The rake was also used to confirm that
little vegetation occurred at depths exceeding 2 m.
Secchi depth, TP, TSS, and ChlA
Secchi depth, TP, TSS, and ChlA were sampled at two
offshore locations every 2 weeks between May and
September of 2008–2011. Selecting only two locations
was deemed sufficient due to the small size of the
lake, and the fact that both locations had nearly
identical water quality parameters. Visual assessments
also suggested that water quality was similar in
inshore and offshore areas of the lake. Secchi depth
was measured from a boat using a 20-cm disc. To
determine TP, TSS, and ChlA, we collected integrated
epilimnetic samples following standard methods
(APHA, 1998). Specifically, at each of the sampling
locations, we first measured the temperature and
dissolved oxygen profile (1 m increments; YSI 55,
Yellow Springs, Ohio, USA) to determine the depth of
the epilimnion. Then, we used a stainless steel 2 L Van
Dorn sampler to collect water samples from the
surface of the lake to the bottom of the epilimnion at
1 m increments. Samples were poured into a clean
plastic container and mixed. From this aggregate, we
collected 200 ml samples for TP analysis, 500 ml for
TSS analysis, and 500 ml for ChlA analysis. All
samples were stored in a cooler and delivered to an
analytical laboratory within 24 h. The TP samples
were analyzed using the persulfate digestion method
(SM 4500-P E-97). The TSS samples were dried to a
constant weight at 103–105C (SM 2540 D). ChlA was
analyzed using 10200 H method (APHA, 1998).
Because our sampling protocol included only one
year of data prior to carp removal (2008), we used
two additional years of data (2004 and 2005) of
Secchi, TP, and ChlA collected by a local watershed
district (http://www.rileywd.org) to better portray preremoval
conditions in the lake. These data were collected
using similar methods but usually only once a
month.
In 2009, we began measuring hypolimnetic TP by
collecting samples of water approximately 1 m
below the thermocline during mid to late summer
when the lake was stratified. These measurements
continued during 2010 and 2011 and were used to
develop a better understanding of the role of abiotic
internal loading in summertime increases in epilimnetic
TP that we observed during each year of the
study. In July 2010, we also installed a vertical array
of temperature data loggers (HOBO Pendant, Onset,
Bourne, MA, USA) spaced every 0.5 m from 1 m
below the surface to the bottom of the lake to
collect continuous data on the stability of summer
stratification and determine if the summertime
increases in epilimnetic TP were associated with
erosion of thermocline and mixing with the phosphorus-
rich hypolimnetic waters.
Native fish
The fish community was assessed in late summer of
each year (2008–2011) using trapnets (single 12 m
lead, single rectangular 0.6 9 1.2 m wire frame
followed by four 0.6 m diameter hoops enclosed with
15 mm bar mesh; Bajer et al., 2012). Five nets were
set along the entire perimeter of the lake for one 24-h
period, all collected fish were counted, and the first 30
of each species were measured for length (nearest
mm).
Data analysis
We conducted separate analyses to assess if carp
removal had an effect on vegetation density and water
quality parameters. Because vegetation density was
measured only once each year, we conducted a t-test
using mean values of vegetation density within each
sampling transect before and after carp removal.
However, because water quality parameters were
measured repeatedly throughout the season (i.e., data
were dependent), we began the water quality analysis
by fitting ordinal day (days 121–273; May 1 to
September 30) models for Secchi, TSS, ChlA, and
TP. While fitting these models, we considered exponential,
quadratic, and 4th degree polynomial models
and used ANOVA and AICc scores to test which ones
provided the best fit for each variable. Once the ordinal
day models were fitted, we tested if adding carp
removal as a categorical variable significantly
increased model fit (i.e., whether reduction in the
residual sum of squares was statistically significant by
ANOVA). Carp removal was evaluated both as an
additive effect and as an interaction term with the
ordinal day. A significant improvement in model fit
would suggest that the seasonal patterns of Secchi,
ChlA, TSS, and TP were different before versus after
carp removal. Because water quality measurements
collected on the same day tend to be similar in small
lakes, we averaged them to represent daily means
before we fitted the models to avoid pseudo-replication.
Data collected during individual years were
lumped into either before removal or after removal
category as among year variation was low. All models
were examined for linearity and homogeneity of
residuals. All statistical analyses were conducted using
R (R Development Core Team, 2012).

xresults

Following carp removal, vegetation density increased
from approximately 5% cover to over 45% cover
(t test; t = 10.13; df = 38; P\0.01) (Fig. 1). Most
of this increase occurred during the first spring
following carp removal but increases continued
throughout the study; percent cover in 2009, 2010,
and 2011 was 37, 54, and 63%, respectively. The
number of aquatic plant species increased from four in
2008 to ten in 2011 (Online Resource 1).
Carp removal had a positive effect on water clarity,
especially in the spring, and TSS but the effects on
ChlA and TP were more subtle. Changes in Secchi
depth in relation to ordinal day were best described by
a quadratic model whose fit increased significantly
after the addition of carp removal and the carp removal
x ordinal day interaction term (F = 19.5, df = 3,
P = 2.33 9 10-7; Fig. 2). The model showed that the
removal of carp caused an increase in water clarity
during May and June (days 120–180) but not during
July through September (days 180–280; Fig. 2).
Changes in TSS in relation to ordinal day were also
best described by a quadratic model whose fit
improved after adding carp removal as both an
additive and interaction term (F = 11.84, df = 3,
P = 1.62 9 10-4; Fig. 2). This model suggested that
carp removal caused a decrease in TSS throughout the
entire season, but particularly in the summer (Fig. 2).
Changes in ChlA relative to ordinal day were best
depicted by a 4th degree polynomial model in which
ChlA was low in the spring and increased rapidly in the
summer. Adding carp removal as an additive term or
an interaction term did not improve model fit
(F = 0.48, df = 5, P = 0.78; Fig. 2) suggesting that
ChlA followed the same seasonal pattern before and
after carp removal. However, visual examination
suggested that ChlA was consistently lower during
May and early June (days 120–160) following carp
removal (Fig. 2). Changes in TP relative to ordinal day
were best described by a quadratic model whose fit
improved only marginally after the inclusion of carp
removal and carp removal 9 day interaction (F =
2.85, df = 3, P = 0.050; Fig. 2). TP increased each
summer both before and after carp removal (Fig. 2).
Mean TP concentrations before and after carp removal
were 69.4 and 75.3 lg/L, respectively. Measurements
of thermal stratification and hypolimnetic TP concentrations
showed that stratification typically occurred
by mid-June and that hypolimnetic TP concentrations
increased rapidly in July and remained high through
August and September. Vertical array of temperature
loggers deployed in the summer of 2010 showed that
although the lake remained stratified during July,
mixing with hypoxic waters occurred in mid-
August (Fig. 3), when hypolimnetic TP concentrations
exceeded 1,000 lg/L. This partial thermocline
erosion was associated with a near doubling of the
epilimnetic TP (Fig. 3). Annual trapnet surveys suggested
that no major changes in the native fish
community occurred after carp removal (Online
Resource 2).

xdiscussion

This study selectively removed carp from a small
stratified eutrophic lake to better understand this
species’ effects on phosphorus, water clarity, and
vegetation density in such systems. We found that
while carp removal had a positive effect on the density
of aquatic vegetation and early season water clarity, it
seemingly had little or no effect on phosphorus
concentration. Our results suggest that in thermally
stratified eutrophic lakes, the role of carp in structuring
phosphorus budgets may be relatively minor as
compared to that of abiotic internal loading. Nonetheless,
carp removal should be viewed as an important
element of efforts aiming to improve water clarity and
restore aquatic macrophytes in stratified lakes.
It has been suggested that common carp and
benthivorous fishes in general can cause a significant
transfer of nutrients from benthic sediments into the
water column due to sediment bioturbation and
excretion (Lamarra Jr., 1975; Breukelaar et al., 1994;
Morgan & Hicks, 2013). However, the lack of a
decrease in phosphorus concentrations following carp
removal in Lake Susan suggests that neither bioturbation
nor excretion played a significant role in phosphorus
budget in this stratified lake. Theoretical
calculations support this conclusion. Using available
phosphorus budgets for benthivorous fishes (Schindler
& Eby, 1997; Vanni et al., 2013), a reasonable daily
food consumption rate by carp (3% body mass) and the
known density of carp in Lake Susan (*100 3-kg carp
per hectare), we estimated a daily carp excretion rate
of approximately 0.4 mg P/m2/d or 0.2 lg P/L/d
assuming a 2-m average depth. Such an excretion rate
could account for only a relatively small fraction of the
observed mid-summer increases of *1.5 lg TP/L/d.
Similarly, although the effect of carp bioturbation on
phosphorus cycling is difficult to quantify because it is
influenced by sediment properties, fish size, and food
availability (Zambrano et al., 2001; Driver et al.,
2005), our results suggest that it was also relatively
insignificant. This conclusion supports findings from
enclosure experiments where the effects of carp
bioturbation were similar in magnitude to those of
excretion (Driver et al., 2005; Matsuzaki et al., 2007).
Several factors, including a larger volume of water,
might explain why the role of carp in phosphorus
cycling appeared lower in Lake Susan than in shallow
lakes (Schrage & Downing, 2004) but we suggest that
more whole-lake experiments be conducted to better
understand this process using ecologically-relevant
scales.
Although carp removal did not seemingly have a
strong effect on phosphorus, a significant improvement
in springtime clarity occurred in Lake Susan
following the removal of carp. In fact, springtime
water clarity in 2009, 2010, and 2011 extended to the
bottom of the lake, an unprecedented event in over
40 years of measurements from this lake. This
increase was associated with a decline in TSS and a
decline in ChlA in the early spring. The decline in TSS
following carp removal was most likely caused by
reduced sediment re-suspension due to benthic feeding
and is consistent with other studies (Lougheed et al.,
1998; Zambrano et al., 2001). The decline in
ChlA despite no change in TP suggests an increase
in filtering zooplankton following the removal of carp
in Lake Susan. Such an increase might have occurred
for two reasons: carp might have exerted predatory
pressure on large zooplankton prior to their removal,
and/or the increase in aquatic vegetation after carp
removal might have created refugia for zooplankton.
Unfortunately, these hypotheses cannot be addressed
as we did not collect zooplankton data in Lake Susan
prior to the removal of carp.
The vegetated littoral zone provides key habitats for
fish, amphibians, and invertebrates, and considerable
effort is currently being spent in North America to
restore aquatic vegetation in lakes by transplantation
and establishing littoral buffering zones (Radomski
et al., 2010). Similarly, freshwater protected areas are
being established in Europe to restore aquatic vegetation
for migratory waterfowl and increase biodiversity
(Williams et al., 2002). This study demonstrates
that these efforts may not always succeed, unless carp
biomass is reduced. The relationship between carp
biomass and vegetation density reported in this study
supports our previous findings from a shallow
Midwestern lake which showed that carp biomass in
excess of 300 kg/ha is damaging to aquatic vegetation,
but relatively little damage occurs in lakes with carp
biomass of less than 100 kg/ha (Bajer et al., 2009).
Because carp biomass often exceeds 300 kg/ha in
aquatic ecosystems across large regions of North
America, Australia, and Europe (Crivelli, 1983;
Koehn, 2004; Bajer & Sorensen, 2012), this species
is expected to have broad and negative impacts on
aquatic vegetation.
Although limited in scope, this study advances our
understanding of the carp’s impacts on lake ecosystems
in several ways. In addition to signaling that the
effects of carp on nutrient cycling may be more subtle
and complex than previously suggested, it appears to
be the first study to employ whole-lake carp biomass
manipulation in a thermally stratified lake. It is also
one of few whole-lake manipulations that selectively
removed carp without impacting the native fish
community, thereby isolating the effects of carp. This
study is also one of few for which mark-and-recapture
estimates of carp biomass are available, advancing
robust management thresholds. The recently developed
ability to determine whether carp are approaching
such thresholds using boat electrofishing (Bajer &
Sorensen, 2012) should allow for more proactive and
targeted carp management schemes in lakes to restore
aquatic vegetation and improve water clarity.