xabstract

In situ seed banks are a promising avenue for restoration of plant communities damaged by anthropogenic
changes. The invasive rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus) has had well documented effects on macrophytes
in north temperate lakes. To understand mechanisms of macrophyte recovery from the seed bank, we examined
seed banks from lakes with different durations of exposure to O. rusticus and compared these findings to longterm
macrophyte surveys. We cored littoral-zone sediments at sediment depths of 0–5, 5–10, and 10–15 cm to
test whether deeper layers hold viable seeds that can be used to restore macrophytes. The seed bank in uninvaded
lakes contained a higher number and richness of viable seeds than did the seed bank in invaded lakes.
Number and richness of viable seeds decreased with sediment depth in all lake categories, and most seeds were
found in the top 10 cm. Among all lakes, at most, 33% of the species recorded in field surveys of standing vegetation
were represented in the seed bank. We conclude that the seed bank has only modest potential to contribute
to natural recovery. Natural regeneration of the macrophyte community is more likely to rely upon vegetative
propagules from remnant stands in invaded lakes, especially from very soft-bottom areas avoided by crayfish.
Our results emphasize the importance of preventing destruction of macrophytes, especially in lakes without habitats
likely to constitute a refuge for macrophytes.

xintroduction

Multiple anthropogenic stressors, including eutrophication,
sedimentation, acidification, and addition of nonnative species,
can reduce aquatic vegetation. Once such disturbances
cease, seed banks can contribute to natural recovery of the
plant community. Seed banks for grassland and wetland
ecosystems have been studied under a variety of circumstances
(e.g., duration and nature of disturbance; Stroh
et al. 2012), but much less is understood about seed banks
for submerged macrophytes in lakes. A lake seed bank
may be less abundant than those from terrestrial and semiaquatic
environments because submerged aquatic plants
have a lower propensity for sexual reproduction and rely
more upon production of vegetative structures for propagation
and spread (Muenscher 1936, Haag 1983, Kautsky
1988). However, most aquatic macrophytes retain the ability
to flower and set seed, and a few species reproduce exclusively
by sexual means (McFarland and Rogers 1998).
Therefore, increased understanding of aquatic plant seed
banks could guide efforts to restore macrophytes once a
disturbance ends.
In the north temperate lake region of Wisconsin and
Michigan, the landscape comprises a patchwork of lakes
with different histories of exposure to the nonnative rusty
crayfish (Orconectes rusticus), which has well documented
deleterious effects on aquatic plants. High densities of rusty
crayfish are associated with decreases in standing macrophyte
abundance and species richness (Wilson et al. 2004).
A survey of 57 lakes in Wisconsin revealed that sites were
less likely to have macrophyte cover as crayfish density increased
(Roth et al. 2007). Moreover, species richness of
the seed bank from an invaded lake was depauperate compared
to that from an uninvaded reference lake (Rosenthal
et al. 2006). A reduction in macrophyte abundance has indirect
and direct effects on higher taxonomic levels (Wilson
et al. 2004) and implications for physicochemical processes
(Carpenter and Lodge 1986). Restoration of the plant
community is an important step for reestablishing normal
ecosystem function after a disturbance, but the location,
abundance, and viability of macrophytes seeds are largely
unknown.
The vertical distribution of viable seeds in lake sediments
has implications for restoration. Depth of seeds in
the sediment can be an indicator of seed age (Leck 1989,
Bekker et al. 1998), and previous investigators have used
sediment depth to examine the history of seed deposition
(Bonis and Lepart 1994, Xiao et al. 2010, Lu et al. 2012).
However, rates of sediment accumulation in littoral zones
of lakes can be highly variable because of microhabitat
conditions, and accumulation rates can range from 0.2 to
3.6 mm/y (Benoy and Kalff 1999). Deeper sediment layers
in invaded lakes may contain seeds deposited before the
destruction of standing aboveground vegetation by O. rusticus.
If so, a possible restoration strategy would be to overturn
sediments in the littoral zone to encourage germination
of deeper, in situ seeds by exposing them to the
conditions required for germination.
Development of effective restoration strategies requires
information on unaffected reference ecosystems, knowledge
of the causes and consequences of degradation, and
knowledge of recovery processes (Clewell and McDonald
2009). The first 2 requisites usually are satisfied in the
course of studies on effects of invasive species, but few investigators
examine the recovery process in a way that is
informative for restoration. The time frame of disturbance
and the resulting effects are important for planning and
prioritizing restoration actions. We studied lakes in 3
O. rusticus-exposure categories: uninvaded, invaded in the
past 24 y, and invaded >24 y ago.
Our goal was to assess the potential for natural recovery
of aquatic plants from lake seed banks, and we focused
on lakes invaded by O. rusticus. We surveyed the aboveground
macrophyte community to provide a quantitative
reference point for comparison of aboveground and seedbank
species richness. We then used greenhouse germination
assays of sediments collected from 3 sediment depths
to test 3 hypotheses: 1) richness and abundance of viable
seeds will be greater in lakes uninvaded by O. rusticus
than in lakes with a history of invasion, 2) in uninvaded
lakes, richness and abundance of viable seeds will decrease
with sediment depth, and 3) in invaded lakes, richness and
abundance of viable seeds will increase with sediment
depth.

xmethods

Site description and field sampling
We studied 6 lakes in Vilas County, Wisconsin (USA),
that are part of a larger multiyear survey of crayfish and
macrophytes begun in 1987. The sites had substrate that
could be sampled with a corer (sand or firm muck). We
visited each sampling site 3 times (1987, 2001, 2011) to
collect data on crayfish and aboveground abundance of
macrophytes and once (2011) to collect sediments for
seed germination assays. We used maps, landmarks, and
global positioning system coordinates to ensure that the
same location and water depth were sampled each time
(Table 1).
We categorized the lakes on the basis of their duration
of exposure to O. rusticus (Table 1). Following Kreps et al.
(2012), we considered a lake to be uninvaded if average
trap catches of rusty crayfish were <10 male crayfish/trap
and invaded if the crayfish populations exceeded this threshold.
Below this threshold, effects of rusty crayfish on macrophyte
standing stock areminimal (Wilson et al. 2004). The
uninvaded lakes, Wild Rice and Upper Allequash, have always
been below the threshold. In the transition lakes,
O. rusticus reached invasive densities ≥10 (Little John) and
16 y (Plum) ago (DML, unpublished data). The invaded
lakes, Presque Isle and Papoose, have had invasive densities
of O. rusticus for ≥34 and 24 y, respectively (Capelli and
Magnuson 1983, Olsen et al. 1991). Sampling in many of
these lakes was infrequent around the time of O. rusticus
invasion, so these are conservative estimates based on
the date of the first record where trap catch was >10 male
crayfish/trap.
We surveyed standing vegetation in late July to early August
1987, 2002, and 2011 with the line–intercept method
(Brower et al. 1997). At each site in each lake, divers visually
assessed the presence or absence of all macrophyte species
crossing the vertical plane of a 0.10-m segment at 1-m
intervals along a 25-m transect. Rare species (those occurring
at just 1 site in a lake) without a positive identification
were not included in our analyses. During the same
periods, we used standard methods to sample rusty crayfish
(i.e., 1 modified Gee minnow trap baited with 120 ± 10 g
of beef liver and set overnight at each site) (Capelli and
Magnuson 1983).
We collected sediments for seed-bank quantification
from 2 to 3 sites in each lake (total sites = 17) in September
2011. At each site, we collected a core every ∼3 m
along a 25-m transect following the depth contour parallel
to shore. We constructed a custom coring apparatus
from 10.16-cm-diameter polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe
that was capped at the top. We cut thin transverse slits
at 5-cm intervals from the bottom edge of the pipe and
resealed them with electric tape to facilitate dividing the
sediment cores into depth strata. A rubber stopper inserted
into the cap after the corer was pushed into the
sediment created a sufficient vacuum to hold the sediments
in place. We immediately divided each core into
3 depth strata (0–5, 5–10, and 10–15 cm) by inserting a
sharp divider into each of the slits. We collected a total of
8 cores on each transect, for a total bottom area = 0.065m2.
We pooled the 8 subcores by depth to produce 3 composite
samples for each site (total sample volume for each
sediment layer = 3.2 L). The sediments were kept in dark
storage at 4°C for 20 to 24 wk to simulate winter stratification
(a condition important for breaking seed dormancy;
Haag 1983).
Greenhouse germination assays
We sieved all sediments collected in the field to remove
particles <250 μm and >4 mm to improve germina-tion by reducing sample volume (ter Heerdt et al. 1996).
We measured % organic content as loss on ignition at
550°C from triplicate 5- to 8-mL sediment samples collected
before sieving (Steinman et al. 2007). We assigned
sediment samples randomly to tanks (n = 51) in a greenhouse.
Tanks were clear 22.7-L containers (0.1 m2 surface
area) containing 5 cm of autoclaved and rinsed sand (Play
Sand; Quikrete Companies, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia), covered
by the lake sediments and 10 to 12 cm of aerated
well water. Four control tanks contained only sand to test
whether the sand base contained seeds. Three additional
control tanks contained sand and 1.5 L of the silt/clay sediments
(<250 μm) removed by sieving to check for small
seeds or spores that might have been lost during sediment
processing. No germination occurred in any control
tank, so we do not report further on either kind of control
tank. We maintained all tanks under full-spectrum metal
halide lights (14 h:10 h light:dark cycle) at ambient temperatures
ranging between 21 and 26°C. The composition
of the sediment samples differed among sites and depths,
so the final volume of sediment added to each tank after
sieving also varied. We recorded sediment height in each
tank after lake sediments were added.
We ran germination assays for 10 wk. To aid in identification
of plants, we promoted foliage growth by adding
1.5 mL of Leaf Zone Aquarium Plant Food (0.10% chelated
Fe, 3.0% soluble potash; Mars Fishcare, Mars, Pennsylvania)
to each tank after the number of germinating
seeds reached a plateau (∼week 8). These nutrients do
not affect germination (Albano Pérez et al. 2011). We
identified and removed seedlings once diagnostic features
(e.g., leaves, stipules, stems, and seed coats) became clear
enough for identification to species or genus with the aid
of keys by Crow and Hellquist (2006a, b). We cultivated
some seedlings after the end of the experiment until diagnostic
features were sufficiently developed.
Data analysis
We ran all analyses in R (version 2.15.1; R Project for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). We analyzed lakewide
mean species richness from field surveys with a
2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with lake category
and year as factors. We used linear models with sediment
depth and lake category as factors to analyze the lakewide
means for seed species richness and count (seedling count
was transformed as log[count + 1] to meet the assumption
of normality). The uninvaded lakes and the 0–5-cm sediment
depth were designated as the reference level within
their respective factors against which the other levels were
tested. We tested for potential influence of site-specific
factors on seed richness and abundance with multiple linear
regressions for each response variable against water
depth of collection site, sediment height in the germination
tanks, and % organic matter of the sediment sample.
We further explored the relationships between duration of exposure to O. rusticus and seed richness and count with
Pearson’s correlation tests for each response variable at
each sediment depth against time since invasion. Each
comparison met the assumption of normality according to
Shapiro-Wilk tests, but we log(x)-transformed the data for
presentation.
We calculated Sørensen’s similarity coefficient to describe
the similarity between the seed bank and standing
vegetation in the field for each lake category. The coefficient
is calculated as Ss = 2c/(a + b), where a is the number
of species in the seed bank, b is the number of species
in the field surveys, and c is the number of species in common.
We could not assign any 1 sediment depth layer to
a specific time period, so we pooled species data from all
3 sediment depths in each lake category and compared
this value to the field surveys over time. We analyzed Ss
with a randomized complete block ANOVA with lake category
blocked by year.

xresults

Invasion by O. rusticus significantly affected standing macrophyte
species richness among lake categories. The highest
richness occurred in uninvaded lakes (ANOVA, F2,9 =
59.86, p < 0.0001; Fig. 1). Transition lakes showed a slight
decrease in macrophyte species richness between 1987
and 2002 (the period during which rusty crayfish densities
increased in these lakes), but overall, changes over time
were not significant (F2,9 = 2.20, p = 0.17). All plant surveys
in the invaded lakes were conducted after crayfish
densities were high, and they reveal consistently low macrophyte
species richness (Fig. 1).
Greenhouse assay of seedling species richness and seedling
count revealed significant differences among lake categories
and over time (Fig. 2A, B). Species richness was
significantly lower at 10–15 cm than at 0–5 cm (linear
model: t = –3.40, p < 0.01; Fig. 2A), but did not differ between
0–5 and 5–10 cm (t = –1.36, p = 0.21). Richness
was significantly greater in uninvaded than in transition
(t = –2.38, p = 0.04) and invaded lakes (t = –4.42, p <
0.01). None of the depth × lake-category interactions were
significant (all p > 0.06). Site-specific factors did not influence
species richness (multiple linear regression: % organic
matter, t = –0.49, p = 0.63; sediment height, t = 0.07, p =
0.95; water depth, t = –1.63, p = 0.13). The count of germinated
seedlings was significantly lower at 10–15 than
at 0–5 cm (linear model: log[count + 1]-transformed data,
t = –3.11, p = 0.01; Fig. 2B), but did not differ between 0–5
and 5–10 cm (t = –1.21, p = 0.26). Seedling count was
significantly lower in transition (t = –2.34, p = 0.04) and
invaded lakes (t = –3.58, p < 0.01) than in uninvaded lakes.
None of the depth × lake-category interactions were significant
(all p > 0.06). Seedling count decreased significantly
with increasing water depth (multiple linear regression: log
[count + 1]-transformed data, t = –2.27, p = 0.04), but was
not affected by % organic matter (t = –0.38, p = 0.71) or
sediment height (t = –0.17, p = 0.87).
Seed species richness at 0–5 cm was correlated with
time since invasion (r = –0.89, p = 0.02; Fig. 3A, Table 2),
but seedling count at 0–5 cm was not correlated with
time since invasion (p = 0.28). None of the correlations
between time since invasion and seedling richness or seedling
count were significant at greater sediment depths (all
p > 0.13; Fig. 3B, Table 2).
Eight taxa germinated in greenhouse assays: Najas
flexilis (% occurrence among all tanks = 25.5%), Chara
spp. (17.6%), Isoetes spp. (13.7%), Potamogeton robbinsii
(5.9%), Potamogeton zosteriformis (2.0%), Zosterella dubia
(2.0%), Eriophorum sp. (2.0%), and an unidentified dicot
(2.0%). Seed species richness was much lower than standing
vegetation species richness. At most, 33% of the species
recorded in the field were in the seed bank for a
given lake category (Table 3). The Sørenson similarity coefficient
for the standing vegetation and seed bank differed
among the lake categories. Similarity was greater in
uninvaded and transition lakes than in invaded lakes (randomized
block ANOVA: F2,4 = 26.1, p < 0.01; Table 3).
Species that were common in the field surveys but absent
in the germination assays included Ceratophyllum demersum,
Elodea canadensis, Myriophyllum spp., Potamogeton
amplifolius, Potamogeton gramineus, Potamogeton richardsonii,
Sagittaria spp., and Vallisneria americana (Table
4).

xdiscussion

Our results support the hypotheses that richness and
abundance of viable seeds will be greatest in lakes with
less exposure to O. rusticus and at shallower sediment
depths. However, we found no evidence that the richness
and abundance of viable seeds increases with sediment
depth in invaded lakes. The pattern of overall decreases
in richness and abundance of viable seeds in lakes invaded
by O. rusticus mirrors the documented negative effects of
O. rusticus on standing vegetation. Moreover, the decrease
in richness scaled linearly with increasing length of time
that the lake had been invaded. Across all lake categories,
the vast majority of richness and abundance of viable seeds
occurs in the top 10 cm of sediment. We identified limitations
for natural recovery from the seed bank in lakes
experiencing long-term (i.e., >24 y) invasion by O. rusticus.
The seed bank in lakes invaded for a shorter period (i.e.,
15–24 y) contained a few species that reflected present and
past standing plant communities. Uninvaded lakes had the
highest richness and abundance of viable seeds in the
sediments, but many species common in the field were not
represented in the seed bank.
The species present in the standing vegetation often differ
substantially from the species present in the seed bank
because of differences among species in methods of propagation
and duration of seed viability (Leck 1989, Matus
et al. 2003). For example, annual plants have a strategy for
higher seed production, whereas plants with longer-lived
vegetative structures may rely upon turions or vegetative
reproduction (McFarland and Rogers 1998). The percentage
of species in the standing vegetation represented in the
seed bank differs across systems and among studies: 50–
85% in wetland systems (Wetzel et al. 2001, Stroh et al.
2012) and 41–64% in lakes (Haag 1983, Kimber et al. 1995,
McFarland and Rogers 1998, Rosenthal et al. 2006). Only
16% of the aboveground species along a lakeshore with
variable flooding rates were detected in the seed bank
(Grelsson and Nilsson 1991). Nevertheless, even with consideration
of the potential variation in the relationship between
aboveground species richness and seed bank richness,
our results illustrated a strong impact of rusty crayfish
on the seed bank. Sørensen’s coefficient scores indicated
that similarity between aboveground richness and viable
seed richness was highest in the uninvaded lakes and that
the invaded lakes had no species in common between the
field and seed bank. The lowest non-0 coefficient of similarity
was found in the transition lakes in 2002 (the first sampling
year after invasion by O. rusticus).
The species that appeared most frequently in our germination
assays are ones that rely heavily or exclusively
on seed, megaspore, or oospore production. Najas flexilis,
the most common seed bank species in our study lakes, is
an annual with no form of vegetative reproduction (Hutchinson
1975). Najas flexilis and Chara spp. were common
in other published germination assays (Kimber et al. 1995,
McFarland and Rogers 1998, Rosenthal et al. 2006). These
species have high ecological importance because they provide
forage for migrating waterfowl and habitat for macroinvertebrates
(Krull 1970, Knapton and Petrie 1999).
Vegetative propagation is the dominant reproductive
strategy for most of the common species in our field survey
that did not appear in the greenhouse assays, including
several species of Potamogeton (Muenscher 1936),
Ceratophyllum demersum (Muenscher 1940), E. canadensis
(Barrat-Segretain and Cellot 2007), V. americana (Korschgen
et al. 1997), and Myriophyllum spp. (Les and Mehrhoff
1999). Based on the success of propagation from seed in
other studies (Kimber et al. 1995, McFarland and Rogers
1998), we were surprised that neither V. americana nor
Sagittaria spp. appeared in our greenhouse assay. However,
seedlings of V. americana are rarely observed in temperate
lakes, so it may be that seed production was lower
in our study lakes in northern Wisconsin than in shallow
lakes in central Wisconsin (Kimber et al. 1995). Elodea
canadensis produces seeds at shallow depths (<1 m) and
has appeared in previous greenhouse germination assays
in low densities (Kimber et al. 1995). However, in >3 decades
of observations in the lakes studied here, we have
never observed E. canadensis, C. demersum, or Sagittaria
spp. flowering at the collection depths of our study sites.
Germination for most aquatic plants occurs within 1
or 2 y of when the seed is set, and some species peak at
3 or 4 y (Hutchinson 1975). Thus, aquatic seeds tend to
be more transient than seeds from many terrestrial plants.
Terrestrial species usually have transient (few years) or
persistent (up to multiple decades) seed-viability strategies
(Bekker et al. 1998). A review of European macrophytes
revealed that persistence of propagules is transient (<1 y)
to short term (Bakker et al. 2013). Chara spp. oospores
can survive ≥4 y (Proctor 1967), and are more likely to
persist in deeper sediments. One of the only species in the
invaded-lake seed bank was Chara spp. at 5–10 cm. Najas
marina seeds retain viability for >4 y when stored in wet
or dry conditions (Agami and Waisel 1984). Given the
modest estimates of seed longevity for aquatic plants, that
we encountered so few viable seeds at greater sediment
depths is not surprising. However, some species of macrophytes
found in shallow lakes have regenerated from the
seed bank >20 y after the loss of submerged vegetation (de
Winton et al. 2000, Lu et al. 2012), and a Nelumbo nucifera
seed germinated after >230 y (Hutchinson 1975).
Thus, natural recovery from the existing seed bank of
a macrophyte community after cessation of a disturbance
is most likely when species have only recently been eliminated
(van der Valk and Pederson 1989). The seed bank
of a fen meadow community represented the predisturbance
diversity of a Cirsio–Molinietum plant community,
but only if the disturbance occurred just a few years prior
(Matus et al. 2003). Our examination of seed banks in
lakes with known disturbance histories and long-term surveys
of standing vegetation confirms that long-term invasions
(>24 y) are detrimental to the standing aquatic
vegetation and to the potential for natural recovery. The
results from transition lakes suggest that invasion for only
15 y substantially diminishes the potential for natural recovery.
Even in uninvaded (i.e., undisturbed) lakes, the diversity
of species in the seed bank is not sufficient to recreate the
aboveground plant community. Therefore, natural recovery
would require a combination of regeneration from the seed
bank and dispersal of seeds and vegetative propagules from
other sources.
Vegetative recolonization from local remnant populations
can provide a significant contribution to recovery
following disturbance (Bakker et al. 2013). Water currents
facilitate transport of relatively heavy vegetative diaspores
(Kautsky 1988). Propagules (both seed and vegetative) also
could arrive at a site via transport by birds and fish (Agami
and Waisel 1984, Carpenter and Lodge 1986). In our invaded
study lakes, dispersal of propagules from remnant
stands, albeit gradual, may be the most promising avenue
for natural recovery.
The reduced species richness detected by our germination
assays compared to the field surveys also may be an
artifact of sampling effort or greenhouse conditions. The
total area of our sediment cores at each site was 0.065 m2,
and the area surveyed using the line–intercept method
was 0.125 to 0.25 m2 (assuming that sediments 2.5 or 5 cm on either side of the line transect were captured
in the survey). This 2- to 4-fold lower sampling intensity
may decrease the chance of detection for seeds relative to
aboveground species richness. A lack of suitable germination
cues also could help explain why some species did
not appear in the greenhouse assays (Stroh et al. 2012).
McFarland and Rogers (1998) had good success germinating
seeds in a low-alkalinity culture solution (but see
Kimber et al. 1995). However, in most studies we encountered,
investigators using the emergence method did not
apply a chemical treatment to stimulate germination (e.g.,
Haag 1983, Bonis and Lepart 1994, ter Heerdt et al. 1996,
Stroh et al. 2012). A follow-up to our study would be to
conduct germination assays in field plots protected from
crayfish instead of under greenhouse conditions (similar
to Matsuzaki et al. 2009). Doing so would increase the
volume of sediment tested and eliminate artifacts that
may have prevented germination in the greenhouse.
We removed large particles (>4 mm) from sediments
to exclude vegetative propagules (ter Heerdt et al. 1996).
However, we also may have removed larger seeds that occur
in the seed bank. Ceratophyllum demersum usually reproduces
via fragmentation, but it also produces large,
spiny fruits (Muenscher 1940). Potamogeton amplifolius,
P. praelongis, and E. canadensis have seeds with maximum
dimensions >4 mm (Haynes 2000, Haynes and Hellquist
2000). However, despite being common in the field, neither
P. amplifolius nor E. canadensis was detected in the
seed bank in other studies in which field exclosures (Wilson
2002) or greenhouse germination assays (Rosenthal
et al. 2006) were done with unsieved sediments.
Site characteristics can influence rates of seed deposition
and sedimentation, both of which directly affect seedbank
dynamics. The water depth of our field sites did not
influence seed-bank species richness, but the number of
germinating seedlings was significantly reduced at greater
water depths. This result is not surprising because seed
production decreases with increasing depth because of reduced
irradiance and greater time required to grow to the
surface, where most flowers are produced (Haag 1983).
Based on the range of littoral-zone sedimentation rate
estimates by Benoy and Kalff (1999), each of our 5-cm
strata could represent 14 to 250 y of sediment accumulation.
In lakes with invasive densities of crayfish and, therefore,
low coverage of standing macrophytes, sedimentation
rates are likely to be reduced (Benoy and Kalff 1999).
Thus, a 5-cm sediment core from an invaded lake may
represent many years of deposition from before invasion
and could contain older seeds that have lost their viability.
Our goal was not to pinpoint times of deposition, but
rather to examine relative patterns of attenuation of seed
viability in each lake. The reduced richness of viable species
at greater sediment depths demonstrates that older,
deeper sediments (i.e., >10 cm) cannot be used to rejuvenate
a diverse plant community in invaded lakes. The implication
of these factors is that sediments collected near
macrophyte beds or in protected bays are more likely to
contain viable seeds.
Our first surveys in the invaded lakes occurred after
invasion, so we do not have pre-invasion data on macrophyte
abundance in these lakes. However, the limnological
and morphometric characteristics of these lakes are
similar to those of our other study lakes, and we have no
reason to think they would not previously have supported
a diverse macrophyte community. In a lake with substrate
and water-clarity characteristics similar to those of our
invaded lakes, the number of submerged macrophyte species
decreased from 12 to 4 after invasion (Rosenthal et al.
2006). Moreover, in one of our invaded lakes (Papoose),
a mucky bay where crayfish are rarely found supports
high macrophyte richness. This remnant stand of vegetation
probably reflects the broader pre-invasion macrophyte
community and could be a potential source of vegetative
propagules for restoration if the crayfish invasion
were reversed.
Management intervention often is necessary to reduce
the source of disturbance and restore the system to a more
desired state. The presence of invasive crayfish (Procambarus
clarkii) in a Dutch lake inhibited the development
of submerged macrophytes (van der Wal et al. 2013). In
our invaded lakes, plans to restore the macrophyte community
would have to begin with substantial reductions of
the O. rusticus population. Strategies for controlling invasive
crayfish include removal via trapping or trawling and
biocontrol with predatory fish (Hein et al. 2007, Peters
2010). Rusty crayfish also can undergo natural population
declines (Kreps et al. 2012). In a Wisconsin lake, the macrophyte
community recovered, at least partly, within 1 decade
after mechanical removal of O. rusticus, but the contribution
of the seed bank relative to vegetative propagules
from remnant macrophyte populations was not estimated
(Hansen et al. 2013).
Our findings are relevant to the natural recovery of
macrophytes in lakes after many kinds of disturbance, including
invasion by other species (de Winton and Clayton
1996) and nutrient loading (Bakker et al. 2013). Because
of the transient nature of lake seed banks, management
efforts to reduce the source of disturbance in a timely
manner are critical to the potential for natural recovery of
macrophytes. Benefits of rapid action include increased
likelihood of presence of viable seeds in the top sediment
layer and preservation of extant remnant populations in
the same water body that can contribute seeds and vegetative
propagules.