xabstract
The exotic predatory cladoceran Bythotrephes longimanus was first observed in Lake Erie on 19 September, 1985. During the early summer immediately prior to its appearance, the clado- ceran community in the central basin of Lake Erie was characterized by large populations of Bosmina longirostris, Eubosmina coregoni, Daphnia mendotae, and Daphnia retrocurva, with the latter three species persisting throughout August and September, along with Diaphanosoma spp. Community compo- sition during early summer 1986 was similar to that of the previous year, but densities of all cladocerans decreased dramatically coincident with the appearance of Bythotrephes in mid-July, and remained sup- pressed throughout August and September. Only D. mendotae was present in appreciable numbers during this period; from mid-July through the end of August, 86–98% of cladoceran biomass (exclusive of Bythotrephes and Leptodora) was contributed by D. mendotae. Densities of Leptodora and Bythotrephes showed a strikingly inverse relationship, both temporally and spatially, during 1986. Size frequency dis- tributions of D. mendotae exhibited an immediate shift towards extremely large (> 2.5 mm) individuals coincident with Bythotrephes’ appearance in 1986, suggesting an upper size limit to efficient prey utiliza- tion by Bythotrephes. These results suggest that Bythotrephes can have substantial impacts both on cladoceran community composition, and on the size distributions of individual species.

xintroduction
The invasion of aquatic systems by exotic inver- tebrates can have profound impacts on the structure and function of native communities (Ricciardi and Rasmussen 1998). Given their use as shipping cor- ridors, the Great Lakes have been particularly sus- ceptible to impacts of invasive species (Mills et al. 1993). One of the more successful exotic inverte- brates to have invaded the Great Lakes is Bythotrephes longimanus Schödler (formerly called B. cederstroemi), a large predatory cladoceran na- tive to northern Europe and Asia. This organism was first found in Lake Ontario in 1982 (Johanns- son et al. 1991) and has subsequently established persistent populations in all of the Great Lakes ex-
cept Lake Ontario and the western basin of Lake Erie (Barbiero et al. 2001). It also has been found in 50 inland Ontario lakes (Therriault et al. 2002) and several inland lakes in the United States (For- man and Whiteside 2000, Jarnagin et al. 2000).
A number of reports are now available docu- menting the impacts of B. longimanus on native zooplankton communities in North America, and while agreeing in some respects, effects have not been entirely consistent in all lakes. Post-invasion decreases in species richness have been docu- mented in the Great Lakes (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004), Harp Lake, Ontario (Yan et al. 2001), and in invaded lakes in the Canadian Shield, compared to uninvaded lakes (Boudreau and Yan 2003). These decreases appear to be due largely, though not en- tirely, to the suppression of cladoceran species, pre-sumably through direct predation. While there ap- pears to be adequate evidence of the ability of Bythotrephes to have a measurable impact on zoo- plankton communities, there is some question as to which members of the cladoceran community are most vulnerable to Bythotrephes predation. Inverte- brate predators have traditionally been thought to select for smaller prey (de Bernardi et al. 1987), in which case intensive invertebrate predation might be expected to increase the mean size of the zoo- plankton community. In Harp Lake, abundances of smaller cladocerans decreased after the arrival of Bythotrephes, while the larger species Daphnia mendotae and Holopedium glacialis increased (Yan and Pawson 1997), resulting in an overall increase in the mean size of the cladoceran community (Yan et al. 2001). Hoffman et al. (2001) similarly pro- vided evidence that Bythotrephes predation resulted in a loss of small individuals of Daphnia pulicaria in Long Lake, Michigan. On the other hand, there is convincing experimental evidence that Bythotrephes has a preference for large cladoceran prey (Schulz and Yurista 1999). Changes seen in the offshore zooplankton communities of Lakes Michigan and Huron after the Bythotrephes inva- sion include dramatic reductions in the large daph- nid D. pulicaria (Lehman 1991, Barbiero and Tuchman 2004), which would be consistent with se- lection for larger prey items. The U.S. EPA’s Great Lakes National Program Office (GLNPO) has been collecting regular spring and mid-summer zooplankton data on Lake Erie since 1983 (see, e.g., Makarewicz 1993). Recently, though, zooplankton data from a series of season- ally intensive monitoring cruises on the central basin of Lake Erie, which had been undertaken by GLNPO in 1985 and 1986, have come to light. This period fortuitously brackets the first appearance of Bythotrephes in that lake and can therefore permit a more temporally detailed examination into shifts in cladoceran community structure immediately fol- lowing the appearance of Bythotrephes. We present those data here, paying particular attention to the potential impacts of Bythotrephes on the size struc- ture of the cladoceran community during the first full year of invasion.

xmethods
Thirteen cruises were undertaken on the central basin of Lake Erie between 26 April and 25 No- vember, 1985; nine cruises were undertaken be- tween 16 April and 1 November, 1986. Ten sampling stations were visited, with depths ranging from 21 m to 24 m, although not all stations were visited during each cruise (Fig. 1). On each sam- pling date, water temperature was measured with an InterOcean thermistor. Chlorophyll a was measured after acetone extraction on a Varian spectropho- tometer. Zooplankton samples were collected with vertical net tows taken at each station from either 20 m or 1 m above the bottom, whichever was shal- lower, using a 0.5-m diameter, 64-μm mesh conical net (D:L = 1:3). The net was equipped with a flow meter and appropriate corrections were made for filtering efficiency. After collection, samples were narcotized with soda water and preserved with 5% formalin solution. Samples were split in the labora- tory using a Folsom plankton splitter, and four stratified aliquots were examined per sample using a stereoscopic microscope such that rare species were enumerated from the less dilute aliquots. On average, about 600 individuals were identified per sample. Length measurements were made from the top of the head to the base of the caudal spine on the first twenty individuals of each species encoun- tered per sample, and biomass (as dry weight) was calculated using length-weight relationships de- rived from the literature (Downing and Rigler 1984).
For each cruise, basin-wide average densities were calculated using all stations visited. Biomass by size category for the dominant daphnids was cal- culated by pooling all length measurements for each species/cruise, increasing the number of mea- surements using a random sampling routine until they equaled the basin-average density for that species, calculating biomass for each length mea- surement, and then summing calculated biomasses by size category. Biomass-weighted median lengths were calculated as the length below which 50% of the biomass for a given species/cruise was associ- ated. Biomass estimates associated with all size cat- egories for each species were then summed to arrive at the total biomass for that species for each cruise.
To attain a rough estimate of the potential impact of Bythotrephes on the cladoceran community, esti- mates of cladoceran production (exclusive of Lep- todora and Bythotrephes) were calculated, and were compared with estimates of Bythotrephes consump- tion. Cladoceran production was calculated as a function of temperature for each sampling date, using an equation and constants from Shuter and Ing (1997):
log(P/B) = α + β(T)
where:
P= production (mg DW/m3/day)
B= biomass (mg DW/m3) T= temperature
α= –1.725
β= 0.044 Daily Bythotrephes consumption was estimated as a function of biomass, such that consumption (mg DW/m3/day) = 80% total Bythotrephes biomass (mg DW/m3) (Table 5 in Johannsson et al. 1999).

xresults
Bythotrephes longimanus was first found in Lake Erie during a cruise on 19 September, 1985 at an average density of 33 individuals/m3 (Fig. 2). While found at four of the five stations sampled during that cruise, no individuals had been found at the same five stations on the previous sampling date (28 August). Individuals were found in roughly similar densities until sampling ceased at the end of November. The native predatory cladoceran Lep- todora kindtii was first seen that year in mid-June and persisted throughout the summer and into au- tumn (Fig. 2). The population declined with the first appearance of Bythotrephes in mid-September, and had disappeared by the next sampling date (12 November). Biomass trends for the two organisms roughly followed densities (Fig. 2), although the larger size of Bythotrephes resulted in relatively greater biomass compared to Leptodora.
In 1986 Bythotrephes first appeared in samples collected on 15 July and was still found, albeit in small numbers, on 27 October, the last sampling date of the season (Fig. 2). Biomass of Bythotrephes in 1986 was considerably higher than was seen in the previous year; the peak biomass in 1986 was over two-and-a-half times that of 1985 (Fig. 2). As in 1985, Leptodora first appeared in early June in 1986. However, whereas in the previ- ous year the population persisted through at least mid-September, in 1986 Leptodora decreased no- tably with the first appearance of Bythotrephes in mid-July. Overall, densities of Leptodora showed a strikingly inverse relationship to those of Bythotrephes, both temporally and spatially (Fig. 3). In only four of the 33 samples in which one or the other species was found in 1986 were both or- ganisms present.
The cladoceran community in 1985 was domi- nated by populations of Bosmina longirostris, Eu- bosmina coregoni, Daphnia mendotae and Daphnia retrocurva, all of which peaked in mid-June (Fig. 4). The Bosmina population dropped to extremely low levels by mid-July, while populations of both Daphnia species and of Eubosmina persisted through September, albeit at numbers substantially below their June peaks. By mid-August, Di- aphanosoma spp. (most likely D. birgei) was also an important component of the cladoceran commu- nity. With the appearance of Bythotrephes in mid September, Diaphanosoma densities decreased no- tably, and both Daphnia populations showed slight declines, while Chydorus was recorded in substan- tial numbers for the first time in the season on that date. By mid-November the larger cladoceran species had declined to extremely low levels while the Bosmina population increased to form a second peak. Chydorus and Eubosmina were also important components of the community at this time.
Biomass trends for individual species in 1985 largely followed those seen with densities, although the relative contribution of each species to biomass was quite different, due to inter-specific differences
in body size (Fig. 4). D. mendotae, D. retrocurva, and E. coregoni contributed substantially to the June biomass peak in 1985, with B. longirostris a relatively minor component in spite of high densi- ties. Overall, D. mendotae and D. retrocurva made up the majority of biomass in July and August, the former contributing on average about 43% of bio- mass during this period, and the latter contributing 27%, although E. coregoni, Diaphanosoma, and Holopedium gibberum each contributed > 10% at various times.
The cladoceran community in 1986 showed some similarities with that of the previous year. As in 1985, the four main species were B. longirostris, E. coregoni, D. mendotae and D. retrocurva, and all four species peaked in early to mid-June, although population maxima in 1986 were approximately half of those seen in the earlier year (Fig. 4). Unlike 1985, however, densities of all of cladoceran species except D. mendotae were reduced to ex- tremely low levels by the mid-July sampling date, when Bythotrephes was first encountered. D. men- dotae remained the sole cladoceran present in appreciable numbers from mid-July until mid- September, although its density was halved coinci- dent with the appearance of Bythotrephes, com- pared to the previous sampling date. Species showing conspicuous decreases in density between the two sampling dates bracketing the appearance of Bythotrephes, i.e., 25 June and 15 July, included B. longirostris, which declined over an order of magnitude from 4,255/m3 to 388/m3, D. pulicaria, which declined from 329/m3 to 81/m3, D. retrocurva, which declined from 5,167/m3 to 52/m3, and E. coregoni, which declined from 2,980/m3 to 19/m3 (Figure 4). Total cladoceran density declined from 17,791/m3 to 3,162/m3, and remained low until the end of summer. Diaphanosoma, which had been a significant component of the cladoceran community at this time during the previous year, did not appear in substantial numbers until mid- September. By mid-November there was a resur-
gence in the B. longirostris population, as was the case in 1985.
Prior to the appearance of Bythotrephes, substan- tial contributions to biomass were made by D. men- dotae, D. retrocurva, E. coregoni, and B. lon- girostris, as had been seen in 1985 (Fig. 4). In contrast to the previous year, however, from mid- July through the end of August, 86-98% of clado- ceran biomass (exclusive of Bythotrephes and Lep- todora) was contributed by D. mendotae. The biomass of D. mendotae actually increased slightly between mid-June and mid-July, in spite of lower abundances. This was due to an increase in extremely large individuals (see below). By mid- September cladoceran biomass was contributed by a greater number of species, although overall bio- mass levels were quite low.
Patterns of epilimnetic warming were very simi- lar between the 2 years, with peak total cladoceran biomass (exclusive of Bythotrephes and Leptodora) occurring both years when temperatures had in- creased to approximately 16°C in early June (Fig. 5). Seasonal chlorophyll a minima coincided with cladoceran biomass peaks in both years. In 1985, cladoceran biomass exceeded 400 mg DW/m3 in mid-June, but dropped to 93 mg DW/m3 by the fol- lowing sampling date (Fig. 5). Biomass ranged be-tween 93 and 177 mg DW/m3 (average = 124 mg DW/m3) throughout the summer, but declined no- tably on 19 September to 36 mg DW/m3. The de- cline in biomass in September was associated with an increase in chlorophyll a.
Although occurring at nearly the same time in the season, and at a nearly identical surface water temperature, the biomass peak in 1986 was approx- imately one-quarter that seen in 1985 (Fig. 5). Cladoceran biomass declined at almost exactly the same point in the season in 1986 as in 1985. How- ever, throughout August and early September, bio- mass levels were approximately an order of magnitude lower than those seen during the same period in 1985. Chlorophyll a concentrations ap- parently responded to the decreased cladoceran biomass in 1986, nearly quadrupling (from 1.34 μg/L to 5.1 μg/L) between mid-July and mid- August. The mid-August value was approximately 60% higher than that seen during the same period in 1985, and suggests that the lower cladoceran
biomass in 1986 was not the result of food limita- tion.
Estimates of cladoceran production and Bythotrephes consumption can provide an indica- tion of the potential contribution of Bythotrephes to the changes in cladoceran community make-up seen after its appearance in 1985 and 1986. Estimated consumption was relatively low in 1985, and only exceeded estimated cladoceran production on one date (Table 1). Calculated Bythotrephes consump- tion in 1986 was much higher; during August and September, consumption amounted to between 132% and 485% of estimated cladoceran produc- tion (Table 1). Assuming that cladocerans consti- tuted a major percentage of Bythotrephes prey items, predation by Bythotrephes could have had substantial impacts on the cladoceran community during this period.
A modest shift occurred in the distribution of biomass amongst size classes for both D. mendotae and D. retrocurva coincident with the appearance of Bythotrephes in 1985, although it is not at all clear if a causal relationship can be inferred. Between 28 August and 19 September, when Bythotrephes was first encountered in samples, the biomass-weighted median size of D. mendotae exhibited a decrease, declining from 1.77 mm to 1.13 mm, while that of D. retrocurva declined from 1.58 mm to 1.11 mm (Fig. 6). In the case of both species, a slightly bi- modal distribution of biomass was apparent on the
earlier sample date, with larger peaks at larger size categories (2.0 mm for D. mendotae and 1.8 mm for D. retrocurva) and smaller peaks at 1.1 mm for both species. These smaller peaks differed little from the peaks seen on the next sample date, both in magnitude and in size category (1.2 mm for both species), suggesting that the larger size classes of individuals had been removed between the two dates, leaving the smaller individuals. While a shift toward smaller individuals after the appearance of Bythotrephes would be consistent with predation ef- fects, assuming selection for larger individuals, very similar shifts were also seen in the size distrib- utions of both species earlier in the season, prior to the appearance of Bythotrephes. Between the 12 June and 2 July sampling dates, coincident with a sharp decline in both populations, the biomass- weighted median size of D. mendotae decreased from 1.71 to 1.18 mm, and that of D. retrocurva de- creased from 1.55 to 1.26 mm. As with the later shifts, size distributions on the earlier sampling date (12 June) were slightly (D. mendotae) or strongly (D. retrocurva) bimodal, with median sizes on the subsequent dates similar to, though slightly higher than, the lower peak on the previous date.
A much less ambiguous shift in the size distribu- tion of D. mendotae biomass occurred in 1986 coin- cident with the appearance of Bythotrephes, although unlike the earlier year the shift was toward unusually large individuals (Fig. 7). Biomass- weighted median size increased from 1.62 mm to 2.61 mm between 25 June and 15 July, with a mode of 2.7 mm seen on the latter date. This is 0.2 mm larger than the largest individual of the species seen in the preceding year. Most biomass remained con- centrated in extremely large individuals in early August, but by mid-August a distinctly bimodal dis- tribution of biomass was apparent, with a substan- tial amount of biomass contained in smaller individuals. This corresponded with a decrease in Bythotrephes densities, from a basin-wide average of 48/m3 on the previous date to 16/m3 on 14 Au- gust. By mid-September, the distribution of bio- mass amongst size classes looked very similar to that seen at the same time in 1985, with limited numbers of large (> 1.5 mm) individuals present and a biomass-weighted median length of 1.03 mm. This situation persisted through the last sampling date.
The decline in D. retrocurva seen with the ap- pearance of Bythotrephes in 1986 was nearly com- plete, and populations remained suppressed until mid-September. Because of the limited numbers, and hence small sample sizes for length measure- ments, statements about changes in size distribu- tions can only be made with caution. Nonetheless, no individuals > 0.9 mm were found during August (Fig. 7), in marked contrast to the previous year when Bythotrephes was not present at that point in the season, and sizes in 1986 remained less than 1.5 mm for the rest of the season. In fact, the upper size limits of D. mendotae and D. retrocurva were quite similar in September and October 1986.
The large daphnid D. pulicaria, a relatively minor component of the pre-Bythotrephes clado- ceran community in 1986, exhibited a biomass size distribution shift in mid-July that was similar to that of D. mendotae. On 25 June most biomass was con- tained in individuals between 1.2 mm and 2.4 mm (Fig. 8). With the appearance of Bythotrephes,
nearly all individuals between 1.5 mm and 2.4 mm were eliminated, leaving a bimodal distribution. Most biomass on this date was concentrated in very large (2.6–3.0 mm) individuals, the same size range in which most D. mendotae biomass was found. In- terestingly, in the case of both species, no individu- als had been seen in this size range on the previous sampling date.

xdiscussion
Populations of several cladoceran species, in- cluding E. coregoni, D. retrocurva, and D. puli- caria, showed marked, immediate declines coincident with the appearance of Bythotrephes in the central basin of Lake Erie during summer, 1986. In addition, Diaphanosoma, which had been abun- dant throughout the summer in the previous year, was absent during most dates on which Bythotrephes was found in 1986. Both the close temporal coupling between the declines of these species and the appearance of Bythotrephes, and the estimates of Bythotrephes consumption relative to cladoceran production during this period, offer sup- port for the hypothesis that predation by Bythotrephes was a causative factor behind these shifts. The same species have shown evidence of long-term declines since the invasion of Bythotrephes in the central and eastern basins of Lake Erie, as well as in Lakes Michigan and Huron (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004). Our study also showed a near complete lack of temporal and spa- tial overlap between Bythotrephes and the native predatory cladoceran Leptodora. A lack of overlap between these two species has also been seen in the initial post-invasion studies on Lake Michigan (Lehman 1988, Lehman 1991) as well as in Harp Lake (Yan and Pawson 1997), Lago Maggiore (Manca et al. 1992) and in previous studies on Lake Erie (Berg and Garton 1988, Johannsson et al. 1999).
In the case of B. longirostris, while populations did decline with the appearance of Bythotrephes in 1986, the seasonal pattern of population develop- ment did not differ substantially from that seen in 1985, i.e., an early summer peak followed by a de- cline, with a subsequent peak in early autumn. A similar seasonal pattern was seen in a lake-wide survey conducted in 1970 (Watson and Carpenter 1974). Distinct long-term decreases in B. lon- girostris have not been seen in GLNPO’s long-term Great Lakes dataset (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004), although regular annual monitoring in the central basin, which takes place in April and August, would likely miss the main population development of this species. Late summer populations of Bosmina longirostris increased in Lake Michigan in the 2 years following the establishment of Bythotrephes, although this was attributed to a de- cline in the offshore populations of Leptodora, a predator of Bosmina (Branstrator and Lehman 1991). In contrast, B. longirostris populations have declined dramatically in Harp Lake since the Bythotrephes invasion (Yan and Pawson 1997, Yan et al. 2001), while mesocosm studies (Wahlström and Westman 1999), feeding experiments on natural offshore zooplankton communities in Lake Huron (Vanderploeg et al. 1993), and analyses of al- lozymes in Bythotrephes from Lake Michigan (Schulz and Yurista 1999) have all demonstrated the susceptibility of Bosmina to Bythotrephes pre- dation. It is possible, therefore, that Bosmina is a potential, but not preferred, food item of Bythotrephes.
The post-Bythotrephes increase in dominance of
D. mendotae relative to its congeners seen in our study has been noted in a number of other studies, and seems to be a hallmark of predation by Bythotrephes in North America. D. retrocurva and D. pulicaria disappeared from the offshore waters of Lake Michigan immediately after the arrival of Bythotrephes (Lehman and Cáceres 1993), and fol- lowing a period of initial decline, D. mendotae has remained the sole daphnid in the offshore of that lake (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004). Populations of D. mendotae have similarly increased in Harp Lake, while D. retrocurva populations have been reduced or absent since the invasion (Yan et al. 2001), and D. mendotae appears to have been little impacted by Bythotrephes in other Canadian Shield lakes (Boudreau and Yan 2003, Strecker et al. 2006). The reasons for D. mendotae’s apparent resistance to Bythotrephes predation is unclear. Relatively large size—either core size (Dumitru et al. 2001, Yan et al. 2001) or effective size attained through the pro- duction of protective helmets and tail spines (Yan and Pawson 1997, Lehman 1991)—has been posited as a potential reason for D. mendotae’s per- sistence in the face of Bythotrephes invasions. Prey preference studies, however, have shown that Bythotrephes is not deterred by the formation of helmets in D. mendotae (Schulz and Yurista 1999). It has also been suggested that diurnal vertical mi- gration (DVM) by D. mendotae could reduce its predation risk from the visual predator Bythotrephes (Schulz and Yurista 1999), and there is evidence that the amplitude of DVM of D. men- dotae increased in Lake Michigan soon after the in- vasion of Bythotrephes (Lehman and Cáceres 1993). D. mendotae currently undergoes very pro- nounced DVM in both Lake Michigan (Barbiero et al. 2005), and the eastern basin of Lake Erie (un- published data). Laboratory experiments also have shown enhanced vertical migration in D. mendotae resulting from exposure to Bythotrephes kairomones (Pangle and Peacor 2006).
In addition to species shifts noted above, the ap- pearance of Bythotrephes in 1986 was also associ- ated with an immediate and substantial decline in total cladoceran abundance and biomass. While a decline in cladoceran biomass had also been seen at the same point in the season the previous year, sum- mer (mid-July–mid-September) biomass levels in 1985 were on average over five times greater than those in 1986, in spite of similar epilimnetic tem- peratures and higher chlorophyll a levels in the later year. The higher chlorophyll a concentrations in 1986, coupled with the shifts seen in cladoceran species composition and size distributions, suggest that predation was important in controlling clado- ceran biomass in 1986. In fact, the dramatic in- crease in chlorophyll a in 1986, coincident with both the decrease in cladoceran biomass and the ap- pearance of Bythotrephes, suggests a release from grazing pressure on the phytoplankton community due to a trophic cascade effect. The August phyto- plankton community in 1986, in comparison to that of 1985, showed distinct increases in a number of groups likely to be susceptible to zooplankton graz- ing, including unicellular centric diatoms, crypto- phytes, and non-filamentous chlorophytes; increases in larger species, such as Fragilaria cro- tonensis, were also seen (unpublished data). Makarewicz and Bertram (1991) presented basin- wide averaged data suggesting that grazing by Daphnia played a role in determining summer chlorophyll concentrations in Lake Erie during the immediate pre-Bythotrephes period. Lehman (1988), in contrast, did not see a post-Bythotrephes increase in algal biomass in Lake Michigan in spite of declines in herbivorous zooplankton abundances, and concluded that primary producers in that lake were constrained by abiotic forces, rather than by grazing.
Decreases in cladoceran abundance/biomass fol- lowing invasions by Bythotrephes also have been documented in Harp Lake (Yan et al. 2002), the Canadian Shield (Boudreau and Yan 2003, Strecker et al. 2006), and in the immediate post-invasion pe- riod in Lake Michigan (Lehman and Cáceres 1993), as well as in several enclosure studies (Strecker and Arnott 2005, Wahlström and Westman 1999). Boudreau and Yan (2003) have suggested an effect threshold of 3-5 Bythotrephes/m3 for reductions in cladoceran density. Average abundances of Bythotrephes during 1986 were substantially higher than that, ranging between 19–84 individuals/m3 from 15 July to 15 September, with an average of 50 individuals/m3. Impacts have been seen in Harp Lake at maximum monthly abundances of approxi- mately 25/m3 or less (Yan et al. 2001). Similarly, median annual populations of Bythotrephes of ap- proximately 15–25 individuals/m3 appear to have reduced daphnid abundances in Lago Maggiore (Manca and Ruggiu 1998). Bioenergetics models and feeding studies also have shown Bythotrephes to be theoretically capable of having substantial im- pacts on zooplankton abundances (Yurista and Schulz 1995, Schulz and Yurista 1999, Dumitru et al. 2001). Johannsson et al. (1999) have estimated that Bythotrephes was capable of consuming 31% -
64% of the seasonal (1 May–1 October) zooplank- ton production (crustaceans and Asplanchna) in the west-central basin of Lake Erie in 1993. Our esti- mates of Bythotrephes consumption, based on the same assumptions used by Johannsson et al. (1999), suggest that during most of the summer of 1986, Bythotrephes consumption exceeded production of cladocerans in the central basin.
In our study, the appearance of Bythotrephes in mid-July 1986 coincided with a dramatic shift in both D. mendotae and D. pulicaria to unusually large (> 2.5 mm) individuals. In the case of D. pulicaria, a bimodal size-distribution was apparent, with modes at approximately 1.3 mm and 2.6 mm and very few individuals in size categories between 1.5 mm–2.5 mm. These results are very similar to those of Lehman (1991), who found that immediately after the initial appearance of Bythotrephes in Lake Michi- gan, residual populations of D. pulicaria exhibited a markedly bimodal distribution with an upper mode of approximately 2.5 mm. No such change was ob- served for D. mendotae in that study, however. In a study on Long Lake, Michigan (Hoffman et al. 2001), size frequencies of D. pulicaria, the dominant daphnid, became notably restricted to large (mean = 2.65 mm) individuals in mid-June, which was attrib- uted to predation by Bythotrephes. Maximum body size of Daphnia (hyalina-galeata group) also in- creased coincident with increases in the Bythotrephes population in Lago Maggiore (Manca and Ruggiu 1998). Evidence of a preference for smaller-sized cladocerans has been seen in Harp Lake, where mean individual cladoceran body length doubled from 0.43 mm to 0.85 mm after the invasion (Yan et al. 2001). This change, however, appeared to be due to a shift in species composition rather than a change in the average size of individual species. These results, taken together, suggest the possibility of an upper size limit to efficient prey utilization by Bythotrephes of approximately 2.5 mm.
Schulz and Yurista (1999), however, showed that, when offered a choice between three different sized D. pulicaria (0.8–1.0, 1.4–1.6, > 2.0 mm), Bythotrephes showed a statistically significant pref- erence for the largest size class. On the basis of these results and observations of feeding behavior, Schulz and Yurista (1999) argued convincingly that Bythotrephes is a raptorial feeder and, therefore, prey selection is not gape-limited, as is the case with a predator such as Leptodora which has a trap basket. However, the apparently enhanced survival of extremely large daphnids might not be inconsis- tent with the findings of Schulz and Yurista (1999) for two reasons. First, in their prey size selection experiments, “large” D. pulicaria were defined as being > 2 mm with no upper limit in this size cate- gory given. If the changes in size distribution in our data are in fact due to prey selection by Bythotrephes, then vulnerability to predation would extend to individuals up to ~2.4 mm, which could well have included the majority of the prey items in their “large” category. Secondly, the enhanced sur- vival of extremely large individuals of Daphnia in our study could have been due to differences in the magnitude of DVM rather than to direct effects of size on prey manageability by Bythotrephes. The amplitude and/or intensity of DVM is known to be a function of body size in a number of daphnid species (Haney and Hall 1975, Guisande et al. 1991, Lampert 1992). As noted above, DVM in D. mendotae has been posited as a reason for its ability to co-exist with Bythotrephes. Therefore, the sur- vival of extremely large daphnid individuals imme- diately following the appearance of Bythotrephes could have been due to an increased DVM and con- sequent reduction in spatial overlap with Bythotrephes in these individuals rather than an in- ability of Bythotrephes to consume them. Of course these two possibilities are not mutually exclusive.
While it is impossible to rule out fish predation as at least a partial cause for the changes in the cladoceran community seen in 1986, several lines of evidence argue against this. Upon the appearance of Bythotrephes in July, the small daphnid D. retrocurva was almost entirely suppressed, while, as noted, size distributions of both D. mendotae and D. pulicaria shifted to extremely large individuals. Planktivory by vertebrate predators, in contrast, typically results in selective removal of larger cladoceran species and in a reduction in the mean length of individuals (Brooks and Dodson 1965). In his classic study, Wells (1970) found that vertebrate planktivory in Lake Michigan resulted in far greater losses to D. galeata, relative to D. retrocurva, and that size distributions of the latter species shifted to smaller individuals when planktivory was intense. Judging from trawl tows undertaken in Pennsylva- nia waters of Lake Erie, the primary forage fish during our study period was rainbow smelt (Os- merus mordax), with relative abundances (mean number per ten minute trawl) of 706 and 1,342 for young of the year, and 2,400 and 469 for yearling and older in 1985 and 1986, respectively (Lake Erie Fish and Boat Commission 2006). This species has been shown to exhibit positive size-selection in Lake Ontario (Urban and Brandt 1993), with both
adult and young of the year favoring large cladocer- ans, and selecting for similarly sized food items (Mills et al. 1995). This would be inconsistent with the patterns that we observed. In fact, it seems more likely that smelt predation might have been respon- sible for the shift in daphnid size frequencies seen in early July, 1985. Smelt in Lake Erie have been shown to switch from a diet composed in large part of benthos and copepods in June to one in which cladocerans feature more prominently in July (pers. comm., S. Parker-Stetter, University of Washington, July 2007). Given the positive size-selection of smelt, such a switch in diet would be consistent with the decrease in daphnid mean size seen in early July, 1985, but is unlikely to account for the shift to larger individuals of D. mendotae and D. pulicaria seen in July 1986.
The data in this study provide further support for the hypothesis that Bythotrephes longimanus has substantially altered the zooplankton community in the central basin of Lake Erie by suppressing mid- summer populations of most cladocerans, with the exception of D. mendotae. Our data also suggest that Bythotrephes predation can impact the size dis- tribution of individual cladoceran species, and specifically that there is an upper size limit of ap- proximately 2.5 mm to efficient prey utilization by Bythotrephes. This can have important indirect con- sequences for aquatic systems, both in its potential impacts on cladoceran filtration capacity and in de- termining availability of appropriately sized prey items for zooplanktivorous fish.
