xabstract
Chemical and/or architectural differences between native and exotic plants may influence invertebrate community composition. According to the enemy release hypothesis, invasive weeds should host fewer and less specialised invertebrates than native vegetation. Invertebrate communities were compared on invasive Alternanthera philoxeroides (alligator weed) and native sedges (Isolepis prolifer and Schoeno- plectus tabernaemontani) in a New Zealand lake. A. philoxeroides is more architecturally and chemically similar to I. prolifer than to S. tabernaemontani. Lower invertebrate abundance, richness and propor- tionally fewer specialists were predicted on A. philoxeroides compared to native sedges, but with greatest differences between A. philoxeroides and S. tabernaemontani. A. philoxeroides is more architecturally and chemically similar to I. prolifer than to S. tabernaemontani. Invertebrate abundance showed taxa-specific responses, rather than consistently lower abundance on A. philoxeroides. Nevertheless, as predicted, invertebrate fauna of A. philoxeroides was more similar to that of I. prolifer than to S. tabernaemontani. The prediction of a depauperate native fauna on A. philoxeroides received support from some but not all taxa. All vegetation types hosted generalist-dominated invertebrate communities with simple guild structures. The enemy release hypothesis thus had minimal ability to predict patterns in this system. Results suggest the extent of architectural and chemical differences between native and invasive vegetation may be useful in predicting the extent to which they will host different invertebrate communities. However, invertebrate ecology also affects whether invertebrate taxa respond positively or negatively to weed invasion. Thus, exotic vegetation may support distinct invertebrate communities despite similar overall invertebrate abundance to native vegetation.

xintroduction
Invasion of natural communities by exotic species is commonly regarded as one of the greatest threats to biodiversity (Kolar and Lodge, 2001). However, relatively little is known about the effects of weed invasion on invertebrate communities (Ernst and Cappuccino, 2005). Where exotic plants differ in chemistry and/or architecture from native plants, they may host differing inverte- brate communities from the pre-existing vegetation. This may be due to differences in the amount of suitable habitat, food, attach- ment sites or degree of shelter from predators which the plants offer to invertebrates.
Invaders which increase structural complexity in an ecosystem often increase total species density and/or diversity through provision of more diverse resources (Crooks, 2002; Lawton, 1983). The reverse is true for invaders which decrease structural complexity in invaded systems. Similarly, plant chemistry can be critical in determining invertebrate abundance. Plants with high tissue nitrogen levels and low levels of defensive compounds represent highly palatable food sources for herbivorous inverte- brates compared to low nutrient or heavily defended plant species (McEvoy, 2002). Higher trophic levels may then vary between plant species in response to differences in prey abundance, or directly in response to structural differences (Hornung and Foote, 2006; Langellotto and Denno, 2004; Pearson, 2009). Those characteristics listed above represent a trade-off of low structural or chemical defences in favour of rapid growth, a strategy characteristic of some invasive plant species (Cornelissen et al., 1999).
The enemy release hypothesis predicts that introduced plant species should host fewer invertebrate herbivores in comparison to the surrounding native vegetation, as many of the herbivores present in the introduced range will be adapted to feed on native vegetation but not the introduced plant (Keane and Crawley, 2002). However, in a review paper, Colautti et al. (2004) found that while some studies did support the prediction of reduced invertebrate abundance on exotic plants, many found higher numbers of enemies (pathogens as well as invertebrates) on exotic rather than native plants. This suggests that exotic plants may in fact represent naïve hosts for native herbivores.
Although some invasive plant species may host abundant native invertebrates, the composition of these invertebrate communities may still differ from those on native vegetation (Schooler et al., 2009). The degree of chemical and/or architectural similarity between an introduced plant and the native vegetation it invades may affect the extent to which this is the case (Douglas and O’Connor, 2003; Harris et al., 2004).
Alternanthera philoxeroides (Mart.) Griseb (Amaranthaceae; alligator weed) is an herbaceous, stoloniferous perennial which grows as a terrestrial or emergent aquatic weed. Native to South America, it is invasive in many parts of the world. Alligator weed was first recorded in northern New Zealand in 1906 (Cheeseman, 1906). Surveys for potential biological control agents within its native range have recorded over 40 species of insects on A. philoxeroides (Maddox et al., 1971). Of those, several have been introduced as biocontrol agents in parts of its exotic range. In New Zealand, the most successful of those has been the alligator weed flea beetle (Agasicles hygrophila Selman & Vogt. (Chrysomelidae)), which has been effective in slow-moving water bodies at restricting weed growth to near banks. Beyond the presence of introduced biocontrol agents, little is known about the invertebrate fauna hosted by A. philoxeroides outside its native range.
This study sought to examine the invertebrate communities hosted by A. philoxeroides in lake-margin vegetation in northern New Zealand, and compare them with invertebrates found on two native sedge species, Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani (C.C.Gmel.) Palla (Cyperaceae) and I. prolifer (Rottb.) R.Br. (Cyperaceae), in the same environment. Although A. philoxeroides is herbaceous, sedges were chosen for comparison as they are the dominant native vegetation type at the site, and, like A. philoxeroides, form virtually monospecific stands. These two sedge species were chosen as they were both abundant at the study site and similar ecosystems within the region, and differ considerably from one another in both architecture and chemistry. Of the two sedges, I. prolifer is the more similar to A. philoxeroides in a number of chemical and architectural attributes (Table 1).
Overall, it was expected that the three plant species would host distinct invertebrate communities. Specifically, the study aimed to test three hypotheses relating to the invertebrate communities hosted by A. philoxeroides and the sedges. These were: (1) That the abundance of invertebrate herbivores and predators would be higher on the more palatable and architecturally complex A. philoxeroides and I. prolifer than on S. tabernaemontani. (2) That as an exotic plant species, A. philoxeroides would host a lower abun- dance and proportion of native invertebrates than hosted on the native sedge species. (3) That the abundance and diversity of specialist herbivores (excluding A. philoxeroides’s introduced biocontrol agent) would be lower on A. philoxeroides than on either sedge species, and that this would be associated with a simplified herbivore guild composition on A. philoxeroides compared with the herbivore guilds present on the sedges.

xmethods
2.1. Study site
This study was conducted at Lake Rotokawau East (34 87ʹ06ʺ S, 173 32ʹ22ʺ E) on the Karikari Peninsula, Northland, New Zealand. The lake is 21.3 ha in area, with an iron-pan base (Champion et al., 2005) and lake-margin vegetation characterised by small-scale patchiness, typical of the numerous small, shallow lakes in the region. A. philoxeroides forms extensive monospecific clumps covering more than 20% of the lake’s margin (Bassett et al., in press). I. prolifer and S. tabernaemontani each cover approximately 3e10% (seasonally variable) of the lake margin, being amongst the most widespread of the native plants occupying the same elevation zone as alligator weed. The lake is surrounded by terrestrial scrub comprised of a mixture of native species such as manuka (Lep- tospermum scoparium; Myrtaceae), bracken (Pteridium esculentum; Pteridaceae) and flax (Phormium tenax; Hemerocallidaceae), with some exotics, such as Acacia longifolia (Mimosoideae). Where the ground becomes seasonally inundated, this scrub gives way to a mosaic of native sedges and reeds (e.g. Machaerina juncea (previously Baumea) M. teretifolia, Eleocharis acuta, E. sphacelata (Cyperaceae), Typha orientalis (Typhaceae)), small aquatic herbs (e.g. Myriophyllum propinquum (Haloragaceae), Glossostigma elati- noides (Phrymaceae)) and the larger herb Persicaria decipiens (Polygonaceae). Several other exotics (most notably Paspalum spp. (Poaceae) and Lotus pedunculatus (Fabaceae)) also occupy season- ally inundated ground though in all cases with much lesser coverage than A. philoxeroides. The surrounding landscape is mostly human-modified, predominantly pastoral farming as is the case throughout most of A. philoxeroides’s current New Zealand distri- bution. The study was conducted at this single lake in a modified landscape as a result of difficulty in obtaining study sites in less modified ecosystems due to the strong imperative to control A. philoxeroides in less degraded ecosystems. During the study period, water depth in the sampling zone ranged from 0.24m`0.05minlatesummerto0.69m`0.03minmidwinter. The climate is subtropical, characterised by mild, frost-free winters and warm summers.
2.2. Sampling methods
The invertebrate fauna on A. philoxeroides and the two sedge species was characterised using two complimentary sampling methods. These were hand removal of invertebrates from excised vegetation, and collection via emergence traps. Patches for both sampling methods were selected using criteria of patch size 4e6 m2, with 2e100 m between patches and as much as possible alternating among the three plant species such that they were interspersed around the lake perimeter.
Excised vegetation involved removal of all vegetation at ground- level from 25 cm 25 cm quadrats (0.0625 m2 in area). One randomly selected quadrat was excised from each of five replicate patches of each vegetation type monthly from FebruaryeApril 2006 and then again from October 2006eApril 2007 (5 replicates 3 vegetation types 10 months 1⁄4 150 samples). No quadrat was sampled more than once. In almost all months at least part of the vegetation removed from each plot was submerged below the water-line, and this was collected in addition to that part of the plant which was emergent above the water. All excised vegetation was sealed in ziplock bags and transported in chilled, insulated containers until it could be refrigerated to mini- mise decomposition of plant and animal matter, and to reduce invertebrate activity and resulting predation. All vegetation was visually inspected at up to 450 magnification. All invertebrates detected were removed, and placed into 70% ethanol.
The second method employed emergence traps placed over vegetation. Emergence traps catch emerging adults of invertebrates that have spent juvenile life stages in the ground and/or water. This trapping method was expected to better capture highly mobile taxa that may be disturbed by the collector in the excised vegetation method, as well as nocturnal species. It also allowed continuous sampling, rather than the excised vegetation method which sampled invertebrate fauna present on a single day each month. Traps were 0.5 m 0.5 m wide (0.025 m2), 1 m tall, and covered with 1 mm mesh. The tops of the traps were pyramidal, with piping from the apex leading to a removable 400 ml collecting jar partially filled with glycol (50% solution) as a preservative. Jars were replaced monthly, and invertebrates sorted and transferred to 70% ethanol.
One emergence trap was erected in each of four replicate patches of each of the three vegetation types, and sampled from January 2006eMarch 2006, and then again from October 2006eMarch 2007, with traps moved to a new position within the patch between sampling seasons to prevent the second season’s collections being affected by restricted invertebrate access in the first season. Therefore we had 4 replicates 3 vegetation types 9 months (1⁄4108 samples). However, vandalism and extreme weather resulted in the loss of data for at least one month for most traps. Therefore results for emergence trap data are presented as average abundance per trap per month (3 vegetation types 4 traps).
2.3. Focal taxa
Total invertebrate abundance was counted for both sampling methods. In addition, three focal taxa were used to address the research hypotheses, as invertebrates may show taxa-specific responses to vegetation type (Di Giulio et al., 2001; Gibson et al., 1992). The three taxa chosen were Hemiptera, Coleoptera and Araneae. The order Hemiptera comprises predominantly herbivo- rous species, and is thus likely to be strongly influenced by plant community composition. Hemiptera collected from excised vege- tation were sorted to morphospecies, then identified to species level. Species were categorised as native or exotic based on the Checklist of New Zealand Hemiptera (Larivière, 2005), and classi- fied by feeding habit based on available literature. Four morpho- species could not be assigned biostatus and/or feeding habit due to insufficient taxonomic resolution.
Araneae were used to examine the effects of vegetation type on predatory invertebrates. Preliminary analyses suggested that differing abundance of the genus Tetragnatha comprised most of the difference in Araneae abundance between vegetation types.
Araneae from excised vegetation were therefore sorted into two categories, being Tetragnatha spp. and “other” spiders.
Very few Hemiptera were recorded from emergence traps. Instead, we focused on Coleoptera from emergence traps because they represented a substantial component of emergence trap catches (but not excised vegetation catches) from all vegetation types. In addition, Coleoptera are a well-described, functionally and taxonomically diverse order, representing approximately 50% of described insect species in New Zealand (Watt, 1982). Coleoptera have also been shown to respond to differences in vegetation cover (Brose, 2003; Harris et al., 2004). Coleoptera were sorted to mor- phospecies then identified to species level. Where possible, pub- lished literature was used to categorise beetles as native or exotic and to assign to feeding groups. Six morphospecies could not be assigned biostatus due to inadequate taxonomic resolution, while available information on feeding modes was insufficient for seven species.
2.4. Data analyses
From excised vegetation, preliminary analyses indicated no vegetation type sampling date or season interactions. Further, sampling date effects are peripheral to the hypotheses tested here. Therefore, abundances were averaged for each patch over the whole sampling period. One-way ANOVA were then used on these patch averages to test for differences in abundance between vegetation types. ShapiroeWilk and Levene’s tests were used to determine whether data were normally distributed and variances homogeneous. Where necessary, data were transformed to over- come these problems. In all cases, log transformations were used, except for Tetragnatha spp. abundance, which was square-root transformed. Medians are presented instead of means where data have been transformed.
To overcome loss of some emergence traps, we determined mean monthly abundance for each trap (averaged across all sampling months where the trap was operational). We then used traps as replicates in one-way ANOVA to examine differences in abundance among vegetation types, using traps as replicates (n 1⁄4 12). We were able to do this as loss of traps tended to occur across all vegetation types evenly in the same months due to events such as extreme weather, and preliminary analyses indicated no interactions between vegetation type and sampling month or season. Tukey’s post hoc tests were used to determine pair-wise differences.
For both Hemiptera and Coleoptera, differences in relative proportions for feeding guilds and biostatus were examined using Chi-squared tests, or Fisher’s Exact tests where Chi-squared assumptions were breached. These analyses were performed on the sum of all individuals caught in each vegetation type over the entire sampling period. Thus we tested, for instance, a 2 3 contingency table for the relative frequency of native vs exotic status across the three vegetation types. For Coleoptera guild composition, we excluded species which were known to be specific to other neighbouring vegetation, as they were assumed to be ‘tourists’ rather than feeding on the vegetation being sampled. We also excluded the alligator weed flea beetle from this analysis. Bonferroni-corrected Fisher’s Exact tests were used post hoc to determine pair-wise differences.
One-way ANOSIM was used to determine the extent of separa- tion between Hemiptera communities on the different vegetation types (Clarke and Warwick, 2001). Data were square-root trans- formed to reduce the influence of highly abundant species (Clarke and Warwick, 2001). A similarity matrix was then created using the BrayeCurtis coefficient (Clarke and Warwick, 2001). ANOSIM uses the dissimilarity matrix to generate an R-statistic which reflects the relative compositional differences in the Hemiptera community between groups (alligator weed, S. tabernaemontani, I. prolifer) vs within groups, and varies between  1 and 1, with 0 indicating completely random grouping, and 1 indicating total separation of groups. SIMPER analysis was then used to determine which Hemiptera species were most influential in separating communities (Clarke and Warwick, 2001). Due to low abundance, both ANOSIM and SIMPER were performed using patches as replicates, including all Hemiptera caught over the duration of the experiment for each patch. Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling (nMDS) was used to visualise differences in Hemiptera community composition between vegetation types. Statistical analyses were conducted in PRIMER 6 and R v2.2.1.

xresults
3.1. Invertebrate abundance
From excised vegetation, average abundance of both spiders and Hemiptera was higher on S. tabernaemontani than on either A. philoxeroides or I. prolifer (Table 2). For Hemiptera, these differ- ences were primarily due to abundant aphids (Rhopalosiphum padi (Linnaeus)) and mealy bugs (Pseudococcus longispinus (Targioni Tozzetti) and Balanococcus sp.) on S. tabernaemontani. In contrast, when only predatory Hemiptera were examined, there were no significant differences between vegetation types (Table 2). High spider abundance on S. tabernaemontani mainly reflected high abundance of the genus Tetragnatha on this structurally simple native sedge (Table 2). In contrast, “other” spiders and overall invertebrate abundance showed no differences between vegetation types (Table 2).
Emergence traps caught a different suite of invertebrates compared to the excised vegetation samples, and this portion of the community showed a different response to vegetation. Mean invertebrate abundance was higher for A. philoxeroides traps compared to S. tabernaemontani traps (Table 3). No differences in Coleoptera abundance were detected among vegetation types, although Coleoptera showed the same trend as total invertebrate abundance (Table 3).
3.2. Biostatus
Native Hemiptera were less abundant on A. philoxeroides than on either sedge species (Table 4), and comprised a lower proportion of total abundance on A. philoxeroides compared to I. prolifer, but not compared to S. tabernaemontani (c2 1⁄4 132.0, P < 0.001; Fig. 1). Exotic Hemiptera were more abundant on S. tabernaemontani than on either A. philoxeroides or I. prolifer (Table 4). At the species level, no differences were detected among vegetation types in mean native or exotic Hemipteran species richness (Table 4), or the relative proportions of native and exotic Hemiptera species for all months combined (Fisher’s Exact test, P 1⁄4 0.8; Fig. 1). The proportions of native and exotic Coleoptera caught in emergence traps (all months combined) varied with vegetation type (c2 1⁄4 92.0, P < 0.001; Fig. 1). I. prolifer traps were strongly dominated by native Coleoptera, particularly members of the family Scirtidae. Native Coleoptera comprised a lower proportion of the total catch from A. philoxeroides than from I. prolifer, but still comprised over half of the total catch from A. philoxeroides. In contrast, over half the Coleoptera collected from S. tabernaemontani traps were exotic. However, at the species level all vegetation types were dominated by exotic Coleoptera (Fisher’s Exact test, P 1⁄4 0.60; Fig. 1).
3.3. Specialist herbivores
Only two feeding guilds of phytophagous Hemiptera were captured; sap-suckers and seed-feeders. I. prolifer hosted a higher proportion of seed-feeders than either of the other vegetation types (Fisher’s Exact test, P < 0.001). This reflected the absence of sap- sucking aphids from I. prolifer, and a high abundance of the seed- feeder Cymus novaezelandiae Woodward (Cymidae) on this sedge. At the species level these differences in guild composition were no longer evident, with no differences detected among vegetation types, probably reflecting low species richness (Fisher’s Exact test, P 1⁄4 0.4).
After excluding Coleoptera species known to be specific to neighbouring vegetation, species of unknown feeding preferences, and the deliberately introduced biocontrol agent A. hygrophila, no differences in Coleoptera phytophage guild composition were detected among vegetation types (Fisher’s Exact test, P 1⁄4 0.7). Root feeders were most abundant in all vegetation types, with stem feeders the only other guild represented.
All the phytophagous Hemiptera collected from all vegetation types have been recorded on other host plant species (Chinery, 1985; Cox, 1987; Lariviere and Larochelle, 2004), and further- more, all those collected from A. philoxeroides were also collected from at least one of the sedges. Agasicles hygrohila was the only Coleoptera species known to be specific to one of the three study plant species. Approximately one third of phytophagous Coleoptera collected (67 individuals from 4 species) were tourist species (sensu Moran and Southwood, 1982), known to be specific to other neighbouring (mainly exotic) plant species (Appendix A). All other beetles collected were known to be generalists, or have inade- quately documented biologies to determine their specificity.
3.4. Overall community similarity
All vegetation types hosted distinctly different Hemiptera communities (Fig. 2). As previously discussed, S. tabernaemontani was characterised by abundant aphids (R. padi) and mealy bugs (Balanococcus sp.). These two species contributed 69% of the difference between S. tabernaemontani and Alligator weed, and 57% of the difference between S. tabernaemontani and I. prolifer (SIMPER analysis). No single species played such a dominant role in differ- entiating Hemiptera communities on alligator weed from those on I. prolifer. C. novaezelandiae was the most influential species differentiating alligator weed and I. prolifer, contributing 23% of the observed difference (SIMPER analysis).

xdiscussion
Contrary to expectation, specialist insect herbivores were absent from all three vegetation types, with the exception of tourist species and one biocontrol agent on A. philoxeroides. The
invertebrate community was predominantly generalist, with a high proportion of introduced species. Invertebrate abundance and diversity showed taxa-specific responses to vegetation type, rather than consistently lower abundance on A. philoxeroides. Thus the enemy release hypothesis had minimal ability to explain patterns among these plant species.
4.1. Influence of plant attributes on invertebrate abundance Invertebrate abundance was predicted to be higher on the more
palatable and architecturally complex A. philoxeroides and I. prolifer than on the tough culms and simple structure provided by S. tabernaemontani. This was the case for some, but not all, taxa. These taxa-specific results are consistent with other studies of invertebrate fauna on invasive plants such as Hymenachne amplexicaulis (Rudge) Nees (Poaceae), Fallopia spp. (Polygonaceae) and Chrysanthemoides monilifera ssp. rotundata (L.) Norlindh (Asteraceae) (Gerber et al., 2008; Houston and Duivenvoorden, 2002; Lindsay and French, 2006; Topp et al., 2008). Thus, plant chemistry, architecture and other attributes influence the associ- ated invertebrate community by interacting with characteristics of the invertebrates, rather than in isolation. However, for most taxa invertebrate abundance did not differ between A. philoxeroides and I. prolifer, supporting the hypothesis that these more architecturally and chemically similar plants would support more similar abun- dances of invertebrates than would the more dissimilar S. tabernaemontani.
Our study did not experimentally test the cause of differences in abundance between plant species. It is thus possible that there may have been an indirect, trophic effect influencing predator abun- dance. However, both observational surveys and experimental manipulation elsewhere found architectural differences directly affect spider abundance and community composition (Pearson, 2009; Pétillon et al., 2005; Woodcock et al., 2007), and it is possible that this direct plant e predator effect is occurring at Lake Rotokawau as well. Web-building spiders, particularly Tetragnatha spp. are highly correlated with architectural features of vegetation, reflecting specific web attachment requirements (Aiken and Coyle, 2000; Gratton and Denno, 2005; Rypstra et al., 1999; Vandergast and Gillespie, 2004). The tall, simple culms of S. tabernaemontani appeared to provide ideal camouflage for Tetragnathids. In addi- tion, they allowed creation of larger webs spanning open, elevated spaces, enabling interception of flighted species not possible in the shorter, denser A. philoxeroides or I. prolifer vegetation.
In contrast to Tetragnathids, other spiders, predominantly Pisauridae, did not prefer S. tabernaemontani over the more archi- tecturally complex plant species. Pisauridae construct their char- acteristic, dense “nursery-webs” on scrub, grass or sedge vegetation to protect their young (Forster and Forster, 1999), rather than slinging large, prey catching webs across open spaces as do the Tetragnathids. This is consistent with architectural differences being a key driver of spider abundance in this system. Structurally simple vegetation such as S. tabernaemontani may also preferen- tially support large, dominant invertebrate predators such as Tet- ragnathid spiders, at the expense of other predatory taxa (Finke and Denno, 2002; Hatley and MacMahon, 1980).
4.2. Influence of plant attributes on invertebrate biostatus
As an exotic plant species, A. philoxeroides was predicted to host a lower proportion of native invertebrates than hosted by either of the native sedge species studied. Overall, A. philoxeroides hosted a less native-dominated invertebrate fauna than one, but not both, of the native plant species tested in our study. Harris et al. (2004) found comparable dominance of New Zealand native inverte- brates on invasive gorse (Ulex europaeus L. (Fabaceae)) and native Kanuka (Kunzea ericoides (A.Rich.) Joy Thomps. (Myrtaceae)), indicating that exotic plants do not necessarily represent a poor quality habitat for native invertebrates. However, the species composition of native invertebrates on both gorse and A. philoxeroides differed from that on native vegetation, suggesting that a subset of native invertebrates may be better than others at utilising exotic plants as habitat. It appears that either enemy release plays little role in alligator weed’s invasiveness, or the pressure exerted on alligator weed by invertebrates in its intro- duced range is less than that in its native range. Whether
invertebrates provide biotic resistance against introduced plants may depend on invertebrate guild structure, along with plant- specific traits such as life-history and degree of pre-adaptation to herbivory (Maron and Vilà, 2001), and other extrinsic factors which promote invasion.
4.3. Influence of plant attributes on specialist herbivores
A. philoxeroides was predicted to host a simplified herbivore fauna, with fewer specialist herbivores than the native sedges. However, the only specialists collected were A. philoxeroides’s biocontrol agent and species associated with neighbouring plants (tourists). This could be explained by two alternative hypotheses; either these lakes (or specifically these two native sedges) are historically generalist-dominated systems, or specialist species previously present have been lost due to factors such as habitat modification.
There is a paucity of records of host specific herbivores of any invertebrate taxa associated with Northland dune lakes in general, or either of the two sedge species studied here. A moth, Bactra optanias Meyrick, is associated with S. tabernaemontani (Crop and Food Research, 2010). In the United Kingdom, four herbivorous species of Hemiptera and one Lepidoptera are known to be hosted by S. tabernaemontani (Biological Records Centre, n.d). All are generalist species also recorded from several other host plant species. No specific herbivores are recorded for I. prolifer (Crop and Food Research, 2010). World-wide, some taxa within both Hemi- ptera (e.g. some members of Delphacidae and Miridae) and Cole- optera (e.g. some members of Curculionidae) are known for their close associations with Cyperaceae and Juncaceae (Bartlett and Wheeler, 2007; Biological Records Centre, n.d; Crop and Food Research, 2010; Novotný, 1995; Wheeler, 2011). However, many of these invertebrates utilise multiple host-plants from within the same plant genus, family or higher taxonomic grouping (Bartlett and Wheeler, 2007; Biological Records Centre, n.d; Crop and Food Research, 2010; Novotný, 1995). Insufficient is known about the ecology of many other Hemiptera and Coeloptera to determine host specificity with any reliability (Bartlett and Wheeler, 2007). Generalist taxa have been found to dominate the benthic fauna of South Island lakes and New Zealand streams (Thompson and Townsend, 2000; Wissinger et al., 2006), suggesting that gener- alist taxa may dominate many aquatic systems in New Zealand, although this likely reflects generalists from orders other than those focussed on in this study (e.g. Plecoptera, Trichoptera). However, other native plants within this system may host a more specialised fauna. We collected four Coleoptera species strongly associated with native Phormium spp. and other native Agavaceae, although these host-plants represent the more terrestrial edge of the study site.
Other ecosystems show a trend towards increasing generalist dominance with increasing habitat loss or modification (Niell et al., 2007; Niemela et al., 2007; Nitterus et al., 2007; Taki and Kevan, 2007), and an effect of the surrounding vegetation matrix on host plant occupancy (Kuschel, 1990; Pawson et al., 2008). Species’ persistence in patches of suitable habitat depends on both the amount of habitat and the spatial configuration of the habitat at the landscape-scale (Hanski, 1998). This suggests habitat modification likely contributed to the generalist and exotic dominance of the invertebrate fauna in our study.
Further research is thus required in a less modified landscape to determine whether A. philoxeroides would attract an unusually exotic and/or generalist fauna relative to native plants where a greater native invertebrate species pool was available. Given the lack of site-level replication in this study, the hypotheses examined here would also benefit by being tested further with either alligator weed and/or other invasive plant species across replicated invaded sites.
4.4. Conclusion
All three plant species hosted distinctly different invertebrate communities. However, as predicted based on a higher degree of architectural and chemical similarity, the invertebrate fauna on A. philoxeroides was more similar to that on I. prolifer than that on S. tabernaemontani. Thus, the extent to which invasive plants differ chemically and/or architecturally from the vegetation they invade may be useful in predicting the extent to which they will host different invertebrate communities, and we can expect A. philoxeroides to have greater impact on invertebrate communities where it invades stands of S. tabernaemontani than where it invades I. prolifer. However, the direction of the effect was not consistent across invertebrate taxa, with some more and others less abundant on S. tabernaemontani. Similarly, proportion and abundance of native species on the three vegetation types varied across inverte- brate taxa. These taxa-specific responses indicate that plant char- acteristics interact with invertebrate characteristics in determining patterns of abundance, and while A. philoxeroides may be able to host considerable native invertebrate communities, these communities are likely to differ in composition from those on native vegetation when it invades sedge-dominated systems. In general, the enemy release hypothesis had minimal ability to predict patterns of feeding guild and specialisation in this system due to the dominance of generalist invertebrates across all three plant species. However lack of basic ecological knowledge from such systems restricts our ability to attribute the generalist fauna to landscape modification rather than historical generalist dominance.

