xabstract
Biological invasions modify the quality and supply of detrital subsidies to aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Where the invader has very different traits to native species, major changes in associated consumer communities may result, as a consequence of differences in their nutritional value and effects on the sedimentary habitat. We assessed how the replacement of seagrasses with the invasive alga Caulerpa taxifolia in modified Australian estuar- ies influences invertebrate communities of mudflats that are subsidized by detritus from submerged aquatic vegetation. Two months after experimental enrich- ment of sediments with high (60 g dry weight per 0.25 m2 plot) or low (30 g dry weight) quantities of either non-native C. taxifolia or native Posidonia australis or Zostera capricorni detritus, there were positive effects of detrital addition on invertebrate abundance that occurred irrespective of the resource added. By 4 months after addition, however, detritus from invasive C. taxifolia had produced effects on benthic communities that could not be replicated by detritus from either of the native seagrasses. Plots receiving the high loading of C. taxifolia detritus contained fewer invertebrates than plots of the other treatments, perhaps due to the induction of sediment hypoxia. The pattern, however, reversed at low detrital loading, with the plots receiving 30 g of C. taxifolia containing more invertebrates and more taxa than the other plots, presumably due to the greater resource availability for detritivores. Our results demonstrate that replacement of native seagrass with invasive algal detritus can have large impacts on sediment-dwelling communities.

xintroduction
In many ecosystems, the majority of plant material is not consumed by herbivores, but returns to the environment as detritus (Cebria ́n 1999). This detritus may remain at the site of production, or be transported by wind, waves and currents across habitat boundaries to new sites where it provides food and habitat (Polis et al. 1997). Bacteria, fungi and protists decompose detrital material, liberating energy and nutrients (Swift et al. 1979). These microorganisms, and the detritus itself, are consumed by invertebrates (Rublee 1982; Findlay and Tenore 1982). Invertebrates, in turn, serve as a source of prey to higher-level consumers (Mel- ville and Connolly 2003). In most environments, detritus is not a homogenous resource, but composed of multiple species (Moore et al. 2004). The role of detrital material in providing food and habitat varies according to its identity, species richness and volume (Leff and McArthur 1989; Blair et al. 1990; Godbold et al. 2009; Bishop et al. 2010). Whereas small quantities of slow- decomposing species can support dense and diverse consumer communities, larger amounts of rapidly- decomposing species may induce anoxia of water- logged sediments, killing deeper-burrowing species (Thrush 1986; Norkko and Bonsdorff 1996; Bolam et al. 2000). Consequently, processes that lead to changes in the supply and composition of detrital materials have the potential to cause major changes to recipient ecosystems.
In both aquatic and terrestrial systems, species invasions, particular of macrophytes (i.e. plants and algae), are an increasingly important cause of change in detrital subsidies (e.g. Allison and Vitousek 2004; Ashton et al. 2005; Taylor et al. 2010). Understanding how the detritus of non-native macrophytes influences ecosystems is a key concern because, following detachment from the parent or substrate, it can be transported large distances and across habitat bound- aries and impact a much larger areas than live macrophytes themselves. Studies to date have primar- ily focused on differences in decomposition rate between native and non-native resources (e.g. Allison and Vitousek 2004; Ashton et al. 2005; Alonso et al. 2010; Godoy et al. 2010) or the uptake of native and non-native sources of carbon by dominant consumers and/or trophic groups (e.g. Casu et al. 2009; Page et al. 2010; Oakes et al. 2011). Far fewer studies have considered changes in the structure of sediment- dwelling invertebrate communities that might arise via a combination of effects of non-native macro- phytes on habitat structure and food resources (but see Levin et al. 2006; Rodil et al. 2008; Whitcraft et al. 2008; Rossi et al. 2011).
Detritus from non-native macrophytes might have particularly large impacts where it enhances the amount of organic material being added to a system, where it has very different physico-chemical charac- teristics to the native resources that it is supplementing or replacing, or where it modifies decomposition of existing detrital materials. Most studies examining impacts of non-native resources on macroinvertebrate communities have done so by comparing effects of
monocultures of native and non-native resources (e.g. Rodil et al. 2008; Whitcraft et al. 2008) Where, however, the non-native species adds to an existing detrital pool it might interact with pre-existing detrital components to influence the macroinvertebrate com- munity. The identity of detrital resources comprising mixtures can have a strong effect on macroinverte- brates (Bishop and Kelaher 2008).
Within the coastal zone, macroalgal introductions are increasingly adding to detrital pools (Schaffelke et al. 2006). Already, at least 277 algal species have been identified outside of their native ranges and hull fouling and aquaculture continue to translocate addi- tional species to new locations (Williams and Smith 2007). Among marine algae, certain groups appear to have a particular propensity to invade (Williams and Smith 2007). These are generally species that are early colonizers and can capitalize on disturbed environ- ments, have rapid rates of growth and/or can regrow following fragmentation (Williams and Smith 2007).
Among introduced algae, Caulerpa taxifolia is regarded as one of the most invasive species (Williams and Smith 2007). Endemic to tropical and subtropical regions, it has invaded large areas of the Mediterra- nean and is also locally abundant in some estuaries of south eastern Australia that are outside of its native range (Meinesz et al. 2001; Industry and Investment NSW 2009). The alga is commonly found on soft bottoms inside and outside seagrass beds (Boudour- esqueetal.1995;DeVille ́leandVerlaque1995; Industry and Investment NSW 2009), where it some- times (but not always, see Jaubert et al. 1999, 2003) negatively influences seagrass biomass (Ceccherelli and Cinelli 1997, 1999). C. taxifolia is particularly abundant in nitrogen-rich coastal waters (Williams and Smith 2007), in environments in which seagrasses are declining from a combination of anthropogenic stressors (see Waycott et al. 2009).
Like many other macroalgae, C. taxifolia is char- acterized by a low C/N ratio (Taylor et al. 2010) and has little structural defense. Consequently, it can decompose much more rapidly than the seagrass litter that it is complementing or replacing (Fernades and Deveney 2008). Whereas seagrasses contain phenolics that can deter herbivory, C. taxifolia contains the secondary metabolite caulerpenyne that can limit fouling and deter some (but not all) herbivores and detritivores (Leme ́e et al. 1993; Amade and Leme ́e 1998; Baumgartner et al. 2009; Taylor et al. 2010). Recent research has shown that C. taxifolia is now an important contributor to the detrital resources of invaded estuaries (Taylor et al. 2010). Yet it remains unclear whether its detritus has a facilitative or inhibitory effect on sediment-dwelling invertebrates relative to native seagrass detritus.
Here, we assess how the invasion by C. taxifolia of estuaries once dominated by seagrass beds will influence invertebrate communities of estuarine mud- flats that are dependent on spatial subsidies of litter that wash in from adjacent submerged aquatic vege- tation. First, we compare concentrations of micro- phytobenthos and communities of macroinvertebrates among plots of sediment experimentally enriched with invasive C. taxifolia, or the native seagrasses Zostera capricorni or Posidonia australis. Second, we com- pare microphytobenthos and macroinvertebrates among plots receiving one of the three possible combinations of two-species mixtures of the three litter-types. We hypothesize that as compared to native seagrass detritus, the much more labile C. taxifolia detritus will: (1) stimulate microphyto- benthic production; (2) facilitate rapid colonization of opportunistic surface deposit feeders and grazers; and (3) at high loadings, reduce macroinvertebrate diver- sity by inducing sediment anoxia. Similarly, we predict that detrital mixtures containing C. taxifolia will support greater microphytobenthic production and fewer macroinveretbrates than mixtures contain- ing only seagrass species.

xmethods
Study site
We tested hypotheses about differences in the benthic communities supported by C. taxifolia, Z. capricorni and P. australis detritus on an intertidal mudflat in Quibray Bay (33°590 S, 151°120 E), New South Wales (NSW), Australia. Quibray Bay is situated on the southern side of Botany Bay, an embayment 15 km south of Sydney that supports considerable areas of seagrass, mangrove and saltmarsh and, more recently, C. taxifolia. During the summer months, when north- east winds prevail, and following storm events, detrital material washes up on the mudflat, fuelling benthic communities (see Bishop et al. 2007, 2010; Bishop and Kelaher 2008). Stable isotope analysis of sediment
cores has revealed that historically (pre 1970), detrital resources were dominated by the two seagrasses, P. australis and Z. capricorni (Macreadie et al. 2012). More recently (post 1970), the contribution of algae to sediments has increased such the two types of source are now approximately equal contributors to sediment signatures (Macreadie et al. 2012). The algal biomass arriving on the estuary’s shores comes from a diversity of species that grow on adjacent rocky shores and in seagrass beds, including Sargassum spp., Ecklonia radiata, Colpomenia sinuosa and increasingly, C. taxifolia (Bishop and Kelaher 2008; Bishop et al. 2010; Taylor et al. 2010). Algal mats of Ulva spp. and Enteromorpha spp. are notably absent from the shorelines of east Australian estuaries, which are highly oligotrophic (Scanes et al. 2007). We con- ducted experimental manipulations of detritus in July 2006, at a time of year when background detrital loading is typically low. Weekly monitoring of our field-site confirmed that there were no significant external inputs of detritus to our system during our experiment. Although our sampling was conducted in the Austral winter, water temperature at this study site displays little change throughout the year (\5 °C; ranging from *18 to 22 °C) and the abundance of benthic invertebrates does not vary seasonally (Bishop et al. 2007).
Experimental design
To test whether C. taxifolia invasion will impact spatially subsidized mudflat communities, we con- ducted two detrital enrichment experiments. The first incorporated an un-enriched control, and six fully orthogonal experiment treatments, with the two fac- tors, detrital identity (3 levels: C. taxifolia, P. australis, Z. capricorni) and supply (2 levels: low [30 g dry weight] and high [60 g dry weight]). This was used to assess whether there was (1) an effect of detrital enrichment on benthic communities that occurred irrespective of detrital identity and (2) where differences among detrital sources lead to differences in their facilitation of benthic communities (Table 1). The control treatment, against which we could assess impacts of enrichment, did not receive detritus. Among experimental treatments, the high supply was based on previous observations of the amount of C. taxifolia that washes up on shores following severe storm events (Taylor et al. 2010). We hypothesized that whereas small amounts of rapidly decomposing C. taxifolia detritus may promote secondary produc- tion, large quantities may lead to sediment anoxia and community collapse. The second experiment com- pared the unenriched control treatment to three experimental treatments of a single factor, mixture, in which we held the total supply of detritus constant (at 30 g dry weight) among treatments, but manipu- lated which two of the three detrital components, C. taxifolia, P. australis, and Z. capricorni, contrib- uted to the mix (Table 1). We hypothesized that mixtures containing C. taxifolia would differentially affect microphytobenthos and macroinvertebrates as compared to the mixture containing the two seagrass species.
We collected fresh (still green) detrital material for experimental enrichments from the shores of Botany Bay, immediately following a storm event. The detritus, which had washed in on the previous high tide, was all of similar age and representative of the material that is rapidly incorporated into sediments following accumu- lation on the shore. The material was dried in the sun, to mimic drying on the high intertidal shore at low tide, then at 60 °C to constant weight to ensure that biomasses were equivalent among treatments. This treatment of detritus is not unrealistic given that in summertime the timing of spring low tides in Botany Bay commonly coincides with the late afternoon temperature maximum, during which air temperatures can reach 40 °C and mudflat surface temperatures can be even higher. Irrespective, use of dried detritus should not have affected decay processes given that patterns of mass loss and chemical changes of fresh litter are frequently comparable to those of dried litter in aquatic systems (Gessner 1991). Dried material was shredded into pieces of \1 mm diameter to represent the particulate form in which it is usually incorporated into mudflats following mechanical breakdown. The detrital sources had C/N ratios (mean 1 ± SE, n = 2) of: 17.1 ± 0.7 (C. taxifolia), 23.0 ± 0.1 (P. australis) and 22.9 ± 0.1 (Z. capricorni).
Detrital enrichments were done within randomly established 0.25 m2 experimental plots situated at a mid tidal elevation (mean low water neap ? 0.5 m) of the Quibray Bay mudflat. Enrichments were done on a small spatial scale because deposition of organic matter on mudflats is patchy at the scale of meters (Kelaher and Levinton 2003). There were seventy experimental plots, separated by at least 2 m, each of which was randomly assigned to one of the ten experimental treatments (9 enrichment treatments and 1 control, n = 7). This level of replication was based on previous studies which have detected significant detrital effects (see Bishop et al. 2007, 2010; Bishop and Kelaher 2008). Detritus was added to experimen- tal plots by evenly hand churning the shredded material into the top 0.05 m of sediments on a low tide, during which the mudflat was exposed to the air. This method has successfully been used to manipulate detrital load at this and other sites (see Kelaher and Levinton 2003; Bishop and Kelaher 2008), including detritus of C. taxifolia (Taylor et al. 2010). Pilot studies for previous experiments at our field site have revealed that 90 % of the shredded material added to sediments is retained by experimental plots over a 1 month period (Taylor et al. 2010). Control plots were hand-churned to mimic the physical disturbance associated with adding detritus, but were not enriched. We did not include an undisturbed control in our design because our previous work on this mudflat did not find any effect of sediment churning on micro- phytobenthos or macroinvertebrates 2 months after disturbance (e.g. Bishop et al. 2007, 2010). Plots were open to mobile species and were marked with a single PVC stake.
We sampled experimental plots 2 and 4 months following experimental enrichment. The 2 months time interval was chosen because it is sufficiently long for any experimental artifacts associated with the physical disturbance of sediments to have dissipated, but short enough that effects of labile C. taxifolia detritus on macroinvertebrates are still evident (see Taylor et al. 2010). A longer time interval of 4 months was also included in the sampling design because seagrasses take longer to decay than labile macroalgae and consequently may only influence macroinverte- brate communities after several months (Bishop and Kelaher 2007). Each of these time intervals was sufficiently brief that we could control background detrital inputs throughout the experiment by hand- removal. At each sampling time, two 20-mm diameter cores were collected from the top 5-mm of each plot to quantify the chlorophyll-a concentration of surface sediment. Chlorophyll-a concentration provides an index of the potential photosynthetic production of the local microphytic population (MacIntyre et al. 1996) and, at our study site, this correlates to more direct measurements of photosynthesis (Bishop et al. 2007). We sampled infauna by collecting a single 100-mm diameter core, depressed to 100-mm, from the centre of each plot.
Cores for chlorophyll-a extraction were immedi- ately placed into a light-excluding cooler and trans- ported to the laboratory within 2 h. In the laboratory and away from natural light, samples were lightly blotted with paper towel to remove excess water, then immersed in 10 ml of 90 % acetone solution at 4 °C for 48 h. The chlorophyll-a concentration of the acetone solution was determined spectrophotometri- cally (SHIMADZU UV—1601 UV Visible) using the Jeffrey and Humphrey (1975) equation for mixed phytoplankton populations.
Cores for assessment of macroinvertebrate com- munities were washed through a 500 lm sieve. The animals retained were fixed in 7 % formaldehyde and then transferred to 70 % ethanol. Under a dissecting microscope, the animals within each sample were enumerated by species, or where this was not possible, morphospecies within genera (Oliver and Beattie 1996). Using the primary literature (e.g. Beesley et al. 1998, 2000), we assigned each species to a feeding guild (sub-surface deposit feeder, surface
deposit feeder, other detritivore, grazer, suspension- feeder or predator/scavenger) based on published information on the feeding modes of the genera and their position in the sediment.
Analyses
We analyzed data from 2 and 4 months separately to avoid issues of non-independence associated with collecting cores at each of the sampling times from the same experimental plots. Analyses were run on the average concentration of chlorophyll-a per plot, total macroinvertebrate abundance, species richness and the abundance of each of the six feeding guilds listed above.
In order to simultaneously test for (1) differences in variables of interest between the control plots and those enriched with a single detrital source and (2) differences among enriched treatments attributable to effects of detrital identity and supply, we utilized asymmetrical Analyses of Variance (ANOVAs). These analyses involved partitioning components of variation through a number of sub-analyses (see Winer 1971). First, we ran one-way analyses testing for differences among all seven treatments (six different types of detrital monoculture and the control). Second, we ran two-way analyses, including only the enrich- ment treatments, testing for effects of detrital identity and supply. We then subtracted variation among enriched treatments from variation among all treat- ments to test for effects of enrichment that occurred irrespective of detrital identity. Analogous asymmet- rical analyses, first comparing detrital mixtures to controls and then comparing detrital mixtures to one another, assessed effects of inclusion of C. taxifolia in detrital mixtures.
The ANOVAs used untransformed data and only in one instance was Cochran’s C test significant, indi- cating heterogeneous data (in this case the analysis was interpreted cautiously). ANOVAs were followed by Student–Newman–Keuls (SNK) tests to identify those treatment means that differed significantly at a = 0.05.

xresults
Experimental enrichment of plots with detritus pro- duced changes in the chl-a concentration of sediments that were dependent on the identity and supply of organic matter (Table 2, Fig. 1a,b). Sampling 2 months after experimental enrichment revealed that plots receiving either C. taxifolia or Z. capricorni detritus had significantly greater concentrations of chl-a (mean ± SE: 5.5 ± 0.3 lg/cm2) than plots receiving P. australis detritus (4.5 ± 0.2 lg/cm2) and, across all treatments, plots receiving 60 g of detritus contained more chl-a (5.6 ± 0.4 lg/cm2) than plots receiving 30 g (4.7 ± 0.3 lg/cm2). The plots receiving 60 g of Z. capricorni (5.9 ± 0.3 lg/cm2) or C. taxifolia (6.2 ± 0.3 lg/cm2) had inflated chl- a concentrations relative to unenriched control plots (4.4 ± 0.4 lg/cm2), but all other detrital enrichment treatments had chl-a concentrations that did not significantly differ from the ambient (Table 2; Fig. 1a). By 4 months after experimental enrichment, the chl-a concentrations within the plots receiving P. australis or Z. capricorni were indistinguishable (mean ± SE: 2.4 ± 0.1 lg/cm2), irrespective of detrital loading. Plots receiving 60 g of C. taxifolia, however, continued to support more chl- a (3.0 ± 0.4 lg/cm2) than plots receiving 30 g of C. taxifolia (2.3 ± 0.1 lg/cm2; Table 2; Fig. 1b).
In contrast, no differences in either the total abundance or species richness of macroinvertebrates were initially evident among experimental treatments 2 months after enrichment (Table 2; Fig. 1c,e). At this initial sampling time, the experimentally enriched plots contained more invertebrates (mean ± SE: 49 ± 3 per 10-cm diameter core) than the control plots (40 ± 4 per core), irrespective of the identity or supply of detritus (Table 2; Fig. 1c) but did not differ in invertebrate richness to controls (Table 2; Fig. 1e). By 4 months after, however, the abundance of macr- oinvertebrates was significantly greater in the treat- ment receiving 30 g of C. taxifolia (58 ± 9 individuals per core) than the treatment receiving 60 g (28 ± 3 per core) - the opposite pattern to that displayed by the microphytobenthos (Table 2; Fig. 1d). The other sources of detritus, P. australis and Z. capricorni, did not differ from one another or the control in their abundance of macroinvertebrates (mean ± SE: 42 ± 2 individuals per core). Overall, the species richness of invertebrates was greater in plots receiving the lower (10 ± 1 taxa per core) than the higher (9 ± 1 taxa per core) loading of detritus (Table 2; Fig. 1e). This main effect was driven by the much greater species richness of invertebrates in the
plots receiving 30 g (13 ± 1 taxa per core than 60 g of C. taxifolia (9 ± 1 taxa per core; Fig. 1e).
Across the two sampling times, 61 taxa contributed to macroinvertebrate abundance. There were: 17 species of surface-deposit feeder, representing 20 % of total abundance; 9 species of sub-surface deposit feeder, representing 3 % of total abundance; 10 species of other detritivores, representing 17 % of total abundance; 5 species of grazers, representing 6 % of total abundance; 4 species of suspension- feeders representing 25 % of abundance; and 16 species of predators/scavengers representing 27 % of total abundance. Of these, detritivores and the com- posite group of scavengers and predators had patterns of abundance 4 months after detrital addition that were determined by both detrital type and amount. Detritivores were more abundant in plots receiving 30 g of C. taxifolia detritus (13 ± 3 per core) than in any of the other treatments (7 ± 1 per core; Table 3; Fig. 2c). Predators and scavengers were less abundant in plots receiving 60 g of C. taxifolia (7 ± 1 per core) than in other plots (12 ± 1 per core; Table 3; Fig. 2d). Grazers, by contrast were influenced only by the quantity of detritus added, with higher abundance in plots with 30 g (3.6 ± 0.4 per core) than 60 g (1.8 ± 0.1 per core) of detrital material (Table 3; Fig. 2e). Sub-surface and surface deposit feeders and filter feeders did not display any difference in abun- dance among experimental treatments (Table 3; Fig. 2a, b f).
Incorporation of C. taxifolia into detrital mixtures did not have any influence on chlorophyll-a concen- trations, macroinvertebrate abundance or species richness when the biomass of detritus was held at 30 g across treatments (Table 4). None of the mixtures produced effects on microphytobenthos or macroin- vertebrates that differed from controls without detritus (Table 4).

xdiscussion
A growing number of studies use stable isotopes to investigate uptake of non-native sources of plant material by detritus-based food-webs (e.g. Levin et al. 2006; Casu et al. 2009). Changes in detrital resource availability may, however, not only modify sediment- dwelling communities by altering pathways of nutri- tion, but also by changing the structural and chemical environment provided by the sediments themselves. Our study is among the relative few (but see Olabarria et al. 2010) to apply experimental enrichments of detritus to field settings to assess net effects of native and non-native resources on benthic invertebrates. We found that 2 months after experimental addition of either non-native C. taxifolia or native seagrass detritus to experimental plots, there were global effects of detrital addition that occurred irrespective of the identity of the resource added. By 4 months after addition, however, detritus from the invasive alga C. taxifolia had produced effects on benthic commu- nities that could not be replicated by detritus from either of the native seagrasses, P. australis or Z. capricorni.
Our initial sampling, 2 months after detrital addi- tion, revealed that the abundance of invertebrates was enhanced in enriched plots irrespective of the quantity or identity of the resource added. It is likely that this pattern was caused by the initial leaching of nutrients from detrital materials stimulating microalgal growth and, in turn, consumer communities. Microalgal growth is frequently nitrogen limited in marine sediments (Heip et al. 1995) and we observed greater chlorophyll-a concentrations in plots enriched with detritus from C. taxifolia or Z. capricorni than in control plots, and an overall enhancement of chloro- phyll-a concentrations within plots with the larger (60 g) than the lesser (30 g) detrital loading. Plots receiving P. australis also had slightly higher chloro- phyll-a concentrations than the control plots, although this pattern was not statistically significant. South- eastern Australian estuaries are highly oligotrophic, and even moderate additions of nutrients can greatly enhance primary production (Scanes et al. 2007).
The effect, 4 months following experimental enrichment, of C. taxifolia on macroinvertebrate communities was dependent on supply. A high loading of C. taxifolia detritus (60 g dry weight per 0.25 m2 plot) resulted in reduced macroinvertebrate abundance relative to the unenriched control, whereas a lesser loading (30 g) had a positive effect on macroinverte- brate abundance and species richness. By contrast, the abundance and richness of invertebrates in plots receiving refractory seagrass detritus was by 4 months no different to in controls. Previous studies have found similar non-linear effects of increasing the supply of labile detrital resources (Bishop and Kelaher 2008; Rossi et al. 2011). The positive effect on
macroinvertebrate abundance of a moderate loading with labile detritus has been explained by the enhanced food availability for detritivores that directly feed on this resource and for grazers that feed on microalgae stimulated by nutrient mobilization (Rublee 1982; Findlay and Tenore 1982; Kelaher and Levinton 2003). The negative effect of a high loading has been explained as a consequence of rapid bacterial breakdown depleting sediments of oxygen and induc- ing mortality of burrowing organisms (e.g. Thrush 1986; Rossi 2006). Yet, whereas in previous studies negative effects of large loadings of labile detritus generally appeared several weeks after enrichment (e.g. Kelaher and Levinton 2003; Olabarria et al. 2010), in this study they were not evident until after 2 months. This may be because some of the detritus was initially recycled through the microbial loop enhancing resource availability for detritivores (Rossi 2007) but over the longer-term consumed oxygen (Lopes et al. 2000). Further studies tracing isotope markers through microbes and invertebrates would be required to investigate the mechanism for this lag.
Similarly, our study did not attempt to determine how C. taxifolia induced changes in macroinvertebrate communities. Nevertheless, we found detritivores to be the group most stimulated by addition of moderate quantities of C. taxifolia, supporting the finding by Casu et al. (2009) that detritivores do consume Caulerpa spp. Additionally, several lines of evidence suggest that at high loading, the negative effect of C. taxifolia was a result of a deterioration of environ- mental conditions in the sediments. First, visual inspection of sediments indicated that by 4 months after detrital addition, the black anoxic layer had reached the surface of sediments in plots receiving the high loading of C. taxifolia. By contrast, in the plots receiving the high-loading of the refractory seagrass- es, P. australis or Z. capricorni, or the low loading of any type of detritus, the upper vertical limit of the black anoxic zone remained well below the sediment surface. Second, we observed white sulphide-oxidis- ing bacteria, symptomatic of hypoxia (Preisler et al. 2007), on the surface of these plots. Third, previous studies have observed hypoxic conditions beneath live C. taxifolia canopies in areas where accumulation of algal fragments has been great (Wright et al. 2010). Fourth, the negative impact of the high loading was most pronounced among burrowing predators and scavengers, with surface-dwelling taxa such as grazers and surface-deposit feeders least affected. Visual inspection of samples indicated that the average size of organisms was similar among treatment and that even biomass was not stimulated by a greater avail- ability of C. taxifolia detritus.
In the plots receiving the high loading of C. taxifolia detritus, we observed an inverse relationship between macroinvertebrate abundance and microphytobenthic biomass. Four months following detrital enrichment, the biomass of microphytobenthos was greater in the plots receiving the highest loading of C. taxifolia detritus than in any of the other treatments, the latter of which did not differ from the control. We hypothesize that the inverse relationship between primary and secondary producers,
also observed in other studies (Rossi 2006; Bishop et al. 2007; Bishop and Kelaher 2008), may be indicative of a release of microphytobenthos from the top-down con- trol of grazing.
Following our previous research which demon- strated identity-dependent effects of detrital species mixing on macroinvertebrate communities (Bishop and Kelaher 2008), we expected that mixtures with C. taxifolia would have differing effects to those with only native seagrasses. To the contrary, inclusion of 15 g of C. taxifolia detritus in mixtures with seagrass had no effect on benthic communities. This may be because the loading, which was much smaller than in previous experiments investigating effects of detrital species mixing (e.g. Bishop and Kelaher 2008; Bishop et al. 2010), was insufficient for non-additive effects to be evident over background detrital inputs. Alterna- tively, key traits of the three detrital resources may not have been sufficiently different to elicit these non- additive effects (see Olabarria et al. 2010). The C/N of the C. taxifolia used in this study was at the high end of observed ratios for this species (Taylor et al. 2010), and was consequently more similar to the C/N of seagrasses than might sometimes be the case. It is likely that in highly nutrient-enriched estuaries where the C/N ratio of C. taxifolia is lower, negative effects of detrital enrichment might be seen at lower loadings than evident here (see also Taylor et al. 2010). Our
results suggest, however, that in less nutrient-enriched estuaries it may be possible to avoid negative impacts of C. taxifolia on detrital food webs by keeping populations small or by raking C. taxifolia detritus from the shore follow die-back events or storms. The high loadings which produced negative impacts in the present study are limited to periods following major storm or die-back events (Taylor et al. 2010).
The global number of introduced macroalgae is increasing rapidly, now numbers at least 277 species, and is expected to increase further as seaweed aquaculture and aquarium trades grow (Williams and Smith 2007). Simultaneously, coastal development is reducing the areal extent of seagrasses at a rate of 7 % year-1 (Waycott et al. 2009). We expect that in other areas of the world where seagrasses have historically been the primary contributors to detrital food webs, but invasive macroalgae now proliferate, similar impacts to benthic food-webs as demonstrated by this study may be seen. Macroalgae generally have much lower C/N ratios and structural carbohydrate concen- trations than seagrasses (Enriquez et al. 1993; Kris- tensen 1994). Consequently, we expect that the acceleration of decomposition rate by macroalgae and hence the induction of anoxic conditions at high loading will be general. Further studies are now needed to test these predictions. Clearly, replacement of refractory with labile litter sources can have large impacts on coastal sediment communities. Strategies for managing impacts of invasive species need to take into consideration that not only live invaders, but also the dead organic matter produced by them, can have large impacts on recipient ecosystems.
