xabstract
In 2004, we revisited a Michigan stream invaded by rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus) to determine if this species continued to expand its downstream range and negatively impact the stream food web. Compared to a 1992 study, we predicted that rusty crayfish would increase in density and downstream distribution from a small lake, resulting in further reduction of in-stream resources such as organic matter, benthic invertebrates, and periphyton. To determine current crayfish distributions and impacts, we conducted a longitudinal survey of crayfish abundance, ran a 28-d leaf breakdown experi- ment, and sampled benthic substrates. Leaf packs of sugar maple (Acer saccharum) leaves were placed at three sites with differing crayfish densities (high, intermediate, and none). Breakdown rates were com- pared across the three sites and for two treatments (closed leaf bags excluding crayfish and open bags allowing crayfish access). Benthic invertebrates were sampled from leaf bags and invertebrates and peri- phyton were sampled from cobbles. In contrast to 1992, we found that the maximum downstream distance of rusty crayfish declined from 4 km to less than 3 km downstream from the lake. Leaves in open bags decayed significantly faster (k = 0.143) than did leaves in closed bags at all sites (k = 0.079) (p = 0.0005). The site lacking crayfish had significantly higher densities of invertebrates compared to both high and intermediate crayfish density sites (p = 0.005). Although we found that rusty crayfish reduced standing stocks of leaves and invertebrates, we did not detect measurable changes in periphyton biomass. Therefore, rusty crayfish have not dispersed further downstream since 1992, but where present, these omnivores significantly reduce resource availability via the consumption of leaf material and benthic invertebrates.

xintroduction
A major goal in invasion biology is to understand potential effects of nonindigenous species in order to reduce further spread and negative impacts. Con- siderable research has been dedicated to determin- ing the impacts of nonindigenous aquatic species using short-term (<1 year in duration) competition, predation, and behavioral studies. Despite these ef- forts, few studies have revisited invaded ecosys- tems to determine if the impacts of an invasive species have remained the same, declined, or in- creased in intensity after the initial invasion (but see Strayer and Malcom 2007).
In the upper Midwest of the U.S., long-term monitoring of many lakes has revealed ecosystem changes following the introduction of an invasive
crayfish (Capelli and Munjal 1982, Lodge et al. 1986, Olsen et al. 1991, Olden et al. 2006). Rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus), which are native to the Ohio River basin (Momot et al. 1978), have been introduced into 19 states in the past 30 years (USGS 2008). Although native to streams and rivers, rusty crayfish have proliferated in many other aquatic habitats, particularly lakes. Once in- troduced into a lake, studies have shown that rusty crayfish can move an average of 29 m/day (Byron and Wilson 2001) and colonize the entire littoral zone up to a depth of 12 m (Wilson et al. 2004). Al- though rusty crayfish densities vary across invaded lakes, in general, abundances increase through time (Olsen et al. 1991, T. Kreps unpublished data).
Extensive information exists on the ecological impacts of rusty crayfish in lakes. For example, rusty crayfish extirpate or hybridize with native crayfish (Hill and Lodge 1999; Perry et al. 2001, 2002), act as dominant herbivores (Capelli and Munjal 1982, Lodge and Lorman 1987, Cronin et al. 2002, Roth and Kitchell 2005) with higher meta- bolic rates than native crayfish (Jones and Momot 1983), and can indirectly reduce sport fish popula- tions (Lodge et al. 2000). In addition, numerous studies have shown that rusty crayfish reduce re- source availability in lakes through the direct con- sumption of macrophytes, snails, and other benthic invertebrates (Lodge et al. 1994, Luttenton et al. 1998, McCarthy et al. 2006, Rosenthal et al. 2006).
Less information exists about the effects of rusty crayfish on streams, with the majority of studies conducted in laboratory mesocosms (Mather and Stein 1993a, Luttenton et al. 1998, Klocker and Strayer 2004). In situ studies of rusty crayfish in streams have included effects of consumption by fish (Mather and Stein 1993a, b), displacement of native congeners (Butler and Stein 1985), and pres- ence in streams connecting two lakes (Puth and Allen 2005). However, to our knowledge, only one field study (Charlebois and Lamberti 1996) has as- sessed the ecological impacts of rusty crayfish on resource availability in streams. Furthermore, no long-term assessment of a stream invaded by rusty crayfish has been conducted.
To determine how the distribution and impacts of this species may change over time, we revisited a stream previously assessed for impacts by rusty crayfish. In 1992, Charlebois and Lamberti (1996) documented the impacts of rusty crayfish on inver- tebrates and periphyton in the Middle Branch of the Ontonagon River in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula. We returned to this stream in 2004 to measure the current longitudinal distributions, densities, and im- pacts of rusty crayfish on resource availability. In the previous study, rusty crayfish were found up to 4 km downstream from an upstream lake, Bond Falls Flowage, which likely was the original site of introduction. Crayfish densities were highest at the lake outflow (3.1 crayfish/m2) and declined with in- creasing distance downstream (to 0.2 crayfish/m2 at the lowermost site). In an enclosure/exclosure ex- periment, Charlebois and Lamberti (1996) found that high densities of rusty crayfish reduced benthic invertebrate biomass and diversity. Periphyton re- sponses were mixed, with chlorophyll a and pri- mary productivity increasing in the presence of crayfish, but ash free dry mass (AFDM) remaining unchanged across crayfish treatments.
In our study, we asked the following questions: (1) Did the longitudinal distribution of rusty cray-
fish change after 12 years of invasion? (2) Did high densities of rusty crayfish continue to alter benthic communities (e.g., suppress invertebrates and stim- ulate periphyton)? (3) Did rusty crayfish affect or- ganic matter processing? First, we predicted that rusty crayfish would be found further downstream than in 1992 and at higher densities due to exten- sion of the invasion front and population growth. Bryon and Wilson (2001) showed that rusty cray- fish have the capacity to move long distances (over 200 m in 2 days), which suggests that downstream migration was probable. Because the Middle Branch has several uninvaded tributaries, down- stream movement of invasive crayfish could have ecological consequences. In addition, rusty crayfish have the potential to attain much higher densities than previously reported in 1992. Second, we ex- pected that foraging by omnivorous rusty crayfish (Dorn and Wojdak 2004) would reduce the abun- dance of benthic invertebrates, periphyton, and de- tritus. Alternatively, crayfish consumption of benthic invertebrate grazers might indirectly in- crease periphyton standing stocks. Exclusion of crayfish in lakes and in laboratory studies has been shown to increase periphyton abundance as an indi- rect response to a release from herbivory (Creed 1994, Luttenton et al. 1998). By contrast, in the Middle Branch, Charlebois and Lamberti (1996) found that periphyton primary production increased when rusty crayfish were present, despite no mea- surable change in biomass. Third, we predicted that rusty crayfish would function as the dominant detri- tivore and increase the rate of leaf breakdown by effectively out-competing other shredding inverte- brates. In streams with abundant organic matter input, crayfish can play a significant role in leaf breakdown (Creed and Reed 2004). As adults, cray- fish have been shown to rely on terrestrial organic matter rather than periphyton as a carbon source (France 1996).

xmethods
Study System
The Ontonagon River is located in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, USA. The main stem is formed by four branches, the East, West, South, and Middle, and collectively this system has been des- ignated as a National Wild and Scenic River with portions protected and managed by the U.S. Forest Service. Watershed characteristics of the Onton- agon River basin are described by Thorp et al. (2005). The Middle Branch of the Ontonagon River (MBOR) originates from Crooked Lake near Wa-tersmeet, MI, flows north 82 km through the Ot- tawa National Forest and empties into Lake Supe- rior in Ontonagon, MI. In 1938, the Copper District Power Company dammed part of the MBOR, form- ing Bond Falls Flowage (Fig. 1), to store and de- liver water for hydropower generation (Bond Falls Hydroelectric Project, FERC No. 1864). Water from the Bond Falls development is diverted by canal to the South Branch, which delivers water to the generating facility at Victoria Reservoir. The re- maining water (~0.85–1.13 m3/sec at baseflow) cas- cades 15 m over a natural rock outcrop (Bond Falls) into the MBOR (FERC No. 1864). Rusty crayfish were first collected in 1992 in Bond Falls Flowage and at the base of Bond Falls (Michigan DNR, unpublished data). In the same year, Charlebois and Lamberti (1996) documented the longitudinal distribution of rusty crayfish along the MBOR. In that study, the highest densities were found at Bond Falls, with densities declining with distance downstream. No rusty crayfish were found beyond 4 km downstream of the falls, although low densities of native crayfish (O. virilis) were ob- served. At the time of our study, rusty crayfish were present only in the two outflowing streams of Bond Falls Flowage (the MBOR to the north and Roselawn Creek to the west, Fig. 1). The three in- flowing streams south of the Flowage (the MBOR, Deadmans Creek, and Trout Creek) were not in- vaded by rusty crayfish.
We revisited the approximate location of three sites that were previously sampled in 1992. Sites were located at 0.6 km, 1 km, and 3 km down- stream of Bond Falls with an average width and depth of 13 m and 0.4 m, respectively (Fig. 1). Each site had similar environmental characteristics but distinctly different crayfish densities that we classified as high, intermediate, and no crayfish sites, respectively (Table 1). At each location, cray- fish densities were determined by snorkeling three replicate belt transects (1 m wide) across the width of the stream [following the same methods as Charlebois and Lamberti (1996)]. Beginning on op- posite banks, two people snorkeled along the tran- sect and counted and identified all adult crayfish (O. rusticus or O. virilis). To study the effects of rusty crayfish on resource availability, we con-ducted a leaf breakdown experiment and sampled benthic substrates from June–July 2004 at each site. Leaf packs were made of green sugar maple leaves (Acer saccharum), the dominant tree species along the riparian zone of this stream. Sugar maple leaves have relatively fast breakdown rates com- pared to other local species (Maloney and Lamberti 1995). Green leaves were collected from trees and air dried for 48 hours and 3.0 g of leaves were bound into leaf packs using a binder clip. Leaf packs were placed into either: (1) a closed mesh bag (~5 mm openings), enclosing leaves and ex- cluding crayfish, and (2) a mesh bag open at the downstream end to allow crayfish entry, but control for water flow effects through the mesh (e.g., Now- ell and Jumars 1984). Mean initial dry mass and ash-free dry mass (AFDM) was estimated from six leaf packs by oven drying leaves (60°C for 24 h) followed by ashing leaves (500°C for 2 h); these leaves were not placed in the stream. Leaf packs (n = 120) were tethered to stakes at each of the three crayfish density sites (n = 40 per site). Five replicates of each treatment were sampled on days 1, 7, 14, and 28 using a 250-μm mesh net held downstream to ensure collection of invertebrates and remnant leaf litter. Leaf packs were rinsed of sediments and invertebrates in the laboratory and oven-dried at 60°C for 24 h. Leaves were then
burned at 500°C for 2 h to estimate AFDM. Invertebrates collected from leaf packs were pre- served in 70% ethanol and identified to genus using Merritt and Cummins (1996). In addition to sam- pling invertebrates from leaf packs, benthic inverte- brates were sampled at each site at the midpoint of the experiment (day 14) using a Surber sampler (0.093 m2; 500-μm mesh size; n = 5 per site). Peri- phyton standing stocks were also measured from five cobbles (each ca. 0.17 m2) at each site on day 28 of the study. Rocks were measured (L, W, D) and invertebrates were removed before brushing pe- riphyton from the entire cobble in the field. Chloro- phyll a was analyzed in the laboratory on a flourometer (TD-700, Turner Designs) using a methanol extraction method (APHA 1999) and AFDM was estimated according to Steinman and
Lamberti (1996).
Leaf breakdown rates were calculated using an
exponential decay model Mt = Mo e–kt where Mt is the initial dry mass and Mo is the final dry mass (Benfield 1996). Breakdown rate coefficients (ex- pressed as k) were calculated for each treatment as the slope of the line fitting the percent AFDM re- maining (log-transformed) versus time (days).
Treatment effects on AFDM remaining over the study period were analyzed using analysis of co- variance (ANCOVA), with day as the covariate. Site effects on invertebrate abundance, chlorophyll a, and periphyton biomass were analyzed using one-way ANOVAs. All statistical analyses were performed using SYSTAT 11 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA) and data were checked for normality, equal variance, and log-transformed when necessary.

xresults
The longitudinal crayfish density gradient docu- mented in the MBOR by Charlebois and Lamberti (1996) over a decade previously was generally sim- ilar to that observed in 2004. Rusty crayfish densi- ties were still highest at the site nearest Bond Falls and decreased downstream; densities were 5.3, 2.3, and 0/m2 compared to lower densities in 1992 of 3.1, 1.8, and 0.2/m2 (Table 1). At 3 km down- stream, neither rusty crayfish nor native crayfish species were found in our 2004 study, although Charlebois and Lamberti found low densities of both species at the same distance in 1992.
Benthic invertebrate densities were significantly higher in the absence of rusty crayfish 3 km down- stream. Cobble substrates at the no-crayfish site had more than twice the number of benthic inverte- brates compared to the high and intermediate cray- fish sites (one-way ANOVA F2,6 = 14.975; p = 0.005; Fig. 2a). Invertebrates on leaf packs also fol- lowed this pattern, with significantly more leaf-as- sociated invertebrates at the no-crayfish site for the duration of the experiment (2-way ANCOVA, F2,17 = 7.241; p = 0.005). Abundances of benthic inverte- brates did not differ between the closed and open leaf packs.
The community structure of benthic invertebrates found in the MBOR was similar to that observed in 1992. Although taxa were not compared across sites in 1992, our results show that taxa richness differed substantially across sites. On cobble substrates, a higher diversity of invertebrate taxa was found at the no-crayfish site (over 15 families) compared to the high rusty crayfish site (9 families; Fig. 2b). At this site cobble substrates were dominated by cad- disflies (e.g., Brachycentrus, Glossosoma), dipter- ans (e.g., Atherix, Tipula, and Chironomidae), and gastropods (e.g., Physa acuta). Leaves at the no- crayfish site were colonized by high numbers of Tipula, Simulium, Hydropsyche, and Chironomidae. In contrast, macroinvertebrates at sites with both high and intermediate rusty crayfish densities had fewer dipterans on leaves and had higher numbers of stoneflies (e.g., Acroneuria) and mayflies (e.g., Baetis, Heptagenia) on cobbles.
Compared to the clear longitudinal gradient pre- sent in crayfish densities and the suppression of in- vertebrates at both high and intermediate crayfish density sites, periphyton standing stocks varied lit- tle across sites. Mean chlorophyll a was lowest at the no-crayfish site, but this difference was not sig- nificant (F2,12 = 1.965; p = 0.183; Fig. 3a). Results from 1992 followed the same pattern, although chlorophyll a was significantly lower at the no- crayfish site, followed by the high-crayfish site, and highest at the intermediate site. Periphyton biomass (AFDM) did not differ significantly across the gra- dient of crayfish density (F2,12 = 0.943, p = 0.417; Fig. 3b) consistent with the 1992 study.
Leaf breakdown was slow until day 7, but rapid from days 7–28 (Fig. 4). However, by the midpoint of the experiment, the open leaf packs that allowed access to crayfish, fish, and large benthic inverte- brates, had significantly faster breakdown rates (k = 0.143) than closed leaf packs (k = 0.079) (F1,4 = 47.747; p = 0.002). We detected no significant dif- ferences among sites in leaf breakdown rates and at the end of the experiment, all leaf packs had less than 20% of original dry mass remaining.

xdiscussion
Longitudinal Decline in Crayfish Abundance
The results of our longitudinal survey indicate that the invasion front of rusty crayfish has not ad- vanced further downstream in the Middle Branch of the Ontonagon River since 1992. Conversely, our survey suggests possible contraction of the popula- tion from almost 4 km downstream of Bond Falls in 1992, to only occasional individuals observed be- yond 1 km and none observed beyond 3 km down- stream in 2004. We were surprised that after at least one decade of invasion, rusty crayfish did not spread further downstream, despite facing strong inter-specific competition for an already suppressed abundance of benthic resources. In spite of higher resource availability downstream (e.g., high densi- ties of benthic invertebrates), crayfish have not suc- cessfully colonized these downstream reaches.
The upstream retreat in rusty crayfish abun- dances despite suitable downstream habitat sug- gests that rusty crayfish may rely on proximity to an upstream lake. A similar phenomenon has been observed for other invasive crayfish. For example, abundances of non-native signal crayfish (Pacifas-
tacus leniusculus) have been shown to be nega- tively related to distance from reservoirs (Light 2003). Other invasive species native to lakes also exhibit reliance to near-lake habitats. Zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha), reportedly exhibit limited downstream colonization from lakes (Horvath et al. 1996); in over 20 streams sampled in one river basin, adult zebra mussels were rarely found be- yond 2 km from the upstream invaded lake (Bo- beldyk et al. 2005). Invasive Daphnia lumholtzi in Missouri rivers were negatively related to distance from upstream reservoirs (Shurin and Havel 2002).
One possible explanation for this pattern may be a reliance on lake-derived food resources. Upstream lakes provide plankton for filter-feeding organisms and nutrients for primary producers in streams out- flows (Vadeboncoeur 1994). During summer, loads of particulate organic carbon, unattached bacteria, and some algal species (e.g., Anabaena) decline by half at only 1 km downstream of the lake (Vadebon- coeur 1994). Filter-feeding zebra mussels may rely on lake-donated plankton for food (Horvath et al. 1996). For rusty crayfish, it is possible that nutri- ent-rich lake water enhances benthic productivity near the lake, thereby providing more food re-sources for large omnivorous crayfish (e.g., peri- phyton, benthic invertebrates).
Another mechanism to explain the higher abun- dance of crayfish near upstream lakes may be that hydrologic disturbance prevents successful colo- nization of downstream habitats. The rigors of tur- bulent flow can affect crayfish mobility, recruitment, and foraging, which may result in dis- lodgement or mortality. Unlike smaller inverte- brates, crayfish do not possess morphological adaptations for high flow environments, such as a flat streamlined body, or the ability to burrow into the hyporheic zone of gravel-bottom rivers. Beyond changing their body position to face the current and maximizing a streamlined form, crayfish can only seek refugia. Some studies, however, suggest that cobble, macrophyte, or streambank refugia do not necessarily protect crayfish from high flow. For ex- ample, flood events have caused declines in cray- fish (Paranephrops planifrons) densities in New Zealand streams, regardless of the availability of boulders and undercut banks for cover (Parkyn and Collier 2004). Recruitment may also be limited in fast-moving waters, as gravid females and young- of-year crayfish may not be able to withstand high water velocities. In the MBOR, very few reproduc- tively active or gravid females were observed downstream of Bond Falls (A. Bobeldyk, pers. obs.). Likewise, only the occasional young-of-year crayfish was collected in Surber samples compared to high numbers collected at the same time in hy- drologically stable lakes in the area. Dislodgement and drift due to hydrologic stress may also result in direct mortality. Turbulence in lake-outflow streams has been shown to increase the mortality of zebra mussel veligers by rupturing their valves (Horvath and Lamberti 1999). Similarly, populations of inva- sive red-swamp crayfish (Procambarus clarkii) in California streams have been shown to be washed out and crushed during storm events (Gamradt and Kats 1996). It is also possible that dislodged and drifting crayfish are more susceptible to fish preda- tors.
Conversely, dam-regulated streams are buffered against high discharge events, at least in upstream reaches. Therefore, crayfish in reservoir-fed streams live in a more stable, lake-like environ- ment. Even though discharge is regulated in the MBOR, it is nearly an order of magnitude higher (2–3 m3/sec) than other more highly invaded streams in the area (generally < 0.2 m3/sec; A. Bo- beldyk, unpublished data). Considering that rusty crayfish are native to the Ohio River basin, it is
likely that this species is better adapted to slow- flow environments (e.g., lakes, lake-ouflows, and slow-moving streams). This may explain in part why densities of rusty crayfish are nearly 4 times higher in nearby lakes and smaller streams than in the MBOR (Momot et al. 1978, Charlebois and Lamberti 1996, A. Bobeldyk unpublished data). Al- though our study was not designed to elucidate the specific mechanism(s) explaining the longitudinal decline in rusty crayfish densities from the up- stream lake, the long-term persistence of the cray- fish gradient in the MBOR suggests that hydrologic stability and juvenile “seeding” from the upstream impoundment are necessary for crayfish survival and recruitment.
Rusty Crayfish as Strong Interactors
In the MBOR, rusty crayfish continue to exert a strong direct negative effect on benthic inverte- brates. The no-crayfish site had more than 2.5 times the number of benthic invertebrates than the sites with rusty crayfish. This pattern suggests that sim- ply the presence of rusty crayfish (at either interme- diate or high densities) substantially reduced invertebrate abundance on inorganic substrates and leaf packs. The mechanisms proposed by Charlebois and Lamberti (1996) to explain such ef- fects were direct consumption, predation-induced drift, and inhibition of colonization due to the pres- ence of crayfish, all of which may still be operating.
The difference in benthic invertebrate communi- ties between crayfish and no-crayfish sites suggests that rusty crayfish may impact certain species more than others. Snails were absent at the high and in- termediate crayfish sites, which is likely due to their vulnerability to crayfish predation (Lodge et al. 1994). Physa acuta (common at the no-crayfish site) are especially prone to predation due to their thin shells, wide aperture, and lack of a protective operculum (DeWitt et al. 1999). Aquatic insects that were absent in the presence of crayfish in- cluded Brachycentrus caddisflies and several dipteran species. It is likely that the feeding behav- ior and limited mobility of these species increases predation risk. For instance, Brachycentrus caddis- flies cling to the surface of rocks to filter suspended particles, and covered most rock surfaces at the no- crayfish site. Not only does this species expose it- self to foraging crayfish, it also does not move rapidly. By contrast, the high and intermediate cray- fish sites were dominated by highly mobile stone- flies and mayflies that may be better adapted to escape crayfish predation. Previous gut content analyses suggest that crayfish are most successful at capturing dipteran larvae compared to other inverte- brates (Perez-Bote 2004).
Our leaf breakdown experiment suggests that rusty crayfish decrease resource availability (i.e., leaf organic matter and benthic invertebrates) at high and intermediate crayfish densities. Where rusty crayfish had access to leaves (i.e., open bags), breakdown was significantly faster than when cray- fish were excluded. Several previous studies have also shown that crayfish increase leaf breakdown rates (Schofield et al. 2001, Usio and Townsend 2002, Creed and Reed 2004). Plant material is fre- quently found in crayfish gut contents and is an im- portant component of their diet (Gherardi et al. 2004, Bondar et al. 2005).
Similar fast breakdown rates in the open leaf bags were observed at all sites, even though the no- crayfish site had significantly more benthic inverte- brates. In addition, leaf bags excluding crayfish and large invertebrates decayed more slowly than leaf bags allowing access to all organisms, suggesting that large invertebrates play a key role in leaf de- composition. Functional redundancy between rusty crayfish and other detritivores (e.g., Trichoptera, Diptera) in shredding leaf litter may explain the similar decay rates across sites. In invaded areas, rusty crayfish appear to be the primary consumers of leaf organic matter, whereas in uninvaded areas redundancy in shredding is provided by other ben- thic invertebrates that maintain equal rates of leaf breakdown.
Periphyton abundance did not show a clear longi- tudinal pattern in our study, which may also be re- lated to redundancy in algal consumption by omnivorous crayfish and grazing invertebrates. Crayfish likely graze periphyton mats, but where crayfish were absent, high densities of macroinver- tebrate grazers likely crop periphyton biomass. En- closure studies have shown that crayfish can increase periphyton biomass by removing senescent algal cells as well as resuspending nutrients (Sten- roth and Nystrom 2003).
Our results from the longitudinal sampling of benthic invertebrates coupled with the leaf break- down experiment suggest that rusty crayfish have pervasive effects on the abundance of benthic in- vertebrates in different habitats, including both in- organic and organic substrates. Although multiple biotic and abiotic factors influence benthic commu- nities in the Middle Branch of the Ontonagon River, we believe that rusty crayfish are strong regulators
of the near-lake stream community and sequester a large proportion of the resources in that area. Sev- eral lines of evidence suggest strong regulation by crayfish. First, the physical parameters that we measured did not differ between sites. Second, ben- thic communities are typically most productive at lake outlets, rather than at downstream locations (Wotton 1979) because lakes provide plankton for filter-feeding organisms and nutrients for primary producers (Bronmark and Malmqvist 1982, Richardson and Mackay 1991, Vadeboncoeur 1994). Our survey showed an opposite pattern with the most diverse and abundant communities at the site furthest from the upstream lake. Third, other benthic resources (periphyton, organic matter, in- vertebrates) are in low supply in the near-lake envi- ronment. We believe these results can be explained by the presence of omnivorous rusty crayfish in up- stream reaches and a release from omnivory down- stream where crayfish were absent. Crayfish therefore represent strong “intermediate regulators” (sensu Lamberti 1996) of the stream community.
Study Implications
The ability of rusty crayfish to invade novel aquatic systems (e.g., lakes and lake-outlet streams), withstand colder temperatures than in their native environment (e.g., undergo a northern range expansion), and out-compete native con- geners (for both food and habitat) has allowed this invasive species to be highly successful. To assist in management efforts, however, it is important to un- derstand if invasion success is long-term and to pri- oritize habitats that are most at risk. Our study has shown that invasion by rusty crayfish does have long-term consequences for invaded streams, but in a relatively limited zone. In the Middle Branch of the Ontonagon River, this species has exerted nega- tive, but fairly constant, impacts on in-stream re- sources for over a decade. Although control efforts have had moderate success at reducing rusty cray- fish populations in lakes (Hein et al. 2007), com- plete eradication has never been achieved. Additionally, open systems such as streams are likely to be poor candidates for population eradica- tion. However, our study also suggests that rusty crayfish may not proliferate in all habitat types. The limited downstream movement of rusty crayfish suggests that natural dispersal through northern streams may be restricted to short distances, and stream populations may require an upstream in- vaded lake for periodic seeding by new colonists. Therefore riverine impacts may be constrained by dispersal ability. Because of their strong ecological effects on invaded systems, a better understanding of the mechanisms limiting natural dispersal of rusty crayfish could be critical in future prevention and control efforts.
