xabstract
The aim of this study was to analyze the changes in the composition and richness of Cladocera in the lit- toral zone of a lake dominated by the exotic macrophyte species Vallisneria spiralis L., 1758. The research on the diurnal spatial distribution of Cladocera in the patches of Vallisneria spiralis, and in comparison, in the open water zone situated between the macrophyte stands, was carried out in July and August 2004 in Lake Licheńskie (central Poland). The Vallisneria habitat was characterized by a great variability in water temperature and oxygen content. In both habitats, the abundance and species richness of Cladocera were higher in July than in August. The density and biomass of cladocerans were higher in the Vallisneria habitat than the open water area. The diel pattern of Cladocera density and biomass distribution in July indicates its use of V. spiralis as a daytime refuge from zooplanktivorous fish.

xintroduction
Aquatic plant beds play an important role in the shap- ing of zooplankton assemblage structures (Van Donk, Van De BunD 2002, KuczyńsKa-Kippen, nagengast 2006). Zooplankton distribution in lakes is affected by various factors, among which the environmental conditions often plays an important role. In shallow lakes, zooplankton undergoes diel horizontal mi- grations (DHM) into the vegetated areas. Daytime hours are spent in or near macrophytes, which serve as a refuge from predators. At night, zooplankton migrates back towards the pelagic zone (BurKs et al. 2002). The littoral zone is quite diverse. This is espe- cially advantageous to plankton organisms that feed on periphyton, which  nd herein an abundant sup- ply of food. For this reason, the presence of plankton organisms is closely associated with macrophytes (Balayla, Moss 2003).Lake Licheńskie is a key element of a power plant cooling system. Extensive plant growth in the lake littoral zone reduces lake water circulation rates as well as its ability to cool water from the power plants. It is also a factor in the ecological changes that are taking place in the lake. Effects of water heating and increased  ow rates on production, species rich- ness, population structure, and the fertility of zoo- plankton found in the pelagic zones of lakes were a subject of long-term and divers studies (HillBricHt- ilKowsKa, zdanowsKi 1978, HillBricHt-ilKowsKa et al. 1988, tunowsKi 2009). Over the past few years, studies on the littoral zone zooplankton community were conducted. paturej et al. (2007) reported ef- fects of littoral heterogeneity and high temperature on the zooplankton. A high species richness of ro- tifers inhabiting the alien plant were determined bye jsMont-KaraBin (2011), and ejsMont-KaraBin, Hutorowicz (2011).Vallisneria spiralis (Hydrocharitaceae) is a non-native species in Poland. It has been found in the lake since the early 1990s (Hutorowicz et al. 2006). The high temperatures of water in the lake were one of the most important reasons for the rapid invasion of V. spiralis in the littoral (Hutorowicz 2006). It has a rather simple morphology and there- fore it is not expected to offer much differentiated substrates for the littoral zooplankton community (ejsMont-KaraBin, Hutorowicz 2011). The aim of the current study was to determine the species rich- ness and abundance of the cladocerans in two littoral habitats in a heated lake.

xmethods

Lake Licheńskie (52o18’N, 18o20’E) is a shallow eutrophic lake (mean depth of 4.5 m) with a surface area of 147.6 ha, situated near Konin, central Poland. Since 1958, it has been heated with cooling waters discharged from the Pątnów and Konin power plants (stawecKi et al. 2007). Lake Licheńskie has the high- est water temperature of the  ve lakes that comprise the cooling system. Mixing processes in the lake take place from top to bottom beginning in early spring through to late autumn. The northern and southern parts of the lake are heated to a lesser degree and can freeze during harsh winter conditions (stawecKi et al. 2007). The littoral zone of Lake Licheńskie is dominated by V. spiralis (Hutorowicz 2006).The study was carried out in July and August 2004, in the shallow part of the lake. The samples were collected from two sites: 1) the V. spiralis (VS) habitat, and 2) a macrophyte-free area (BR). Sampling was carried out eight times within a 24- hour cycle. Zooplankton samples were collected  ve times (5 L volume of each sample) using a Patalas sampler. The samples were concentrated with a 60- μm plankton net and  xed immediately with Lugol’s solution and 96% ethyl alcohol. The cladocerans in the samples were analyzed to species level follow- ing Flössner (1972). Moreover, water temperature (± 0.1°C) and dissolved oxygen content (± 0.1 mg O2 dm-3) were measured at each sampling site. Species biomass was estimated using length-weight equa- tions (Bottrell et al. 1976).The zooplankton data were transformed using ln(x+1) to stabilize any variances. ANOVA were
used to analyze water temperature and oxygen con- tent data for the two habitats studied in July and August. Tukey’s test was used in post-hoc analysis. The Mann-Whitney test was used to compare the species richness, density, and biomass of the two habitats. Pearson’s correlation analysis was used for testing the associations between the time of day, water temperature, oxygen content and total den- sity or total biomass as well as the abundance of the  ve most numerous species. Statistical analyses were performed with Statistica 8.0 (StatSoft, Tulsa, Oklahoma).

xresults
Environmental conditionsSigni cant spatial (VS-BR) and temporal variations (July-August) in water temperature were observed in the littoral zone of Lake Licheńskie (P < 0.05). Signi cantly higher water temperatures were record- ed in July than in August (P < 0.05). The lowest wa- ter temperature in July was recorded at 03:00 hours in the VS habitat (25.4°C). Water temperatures in- creased starting at 06:00 hours and reached the high- est levels in both habitats at 15:00 hours (27.7°C). In August, water temperatures were slightly higher in the BR habitat (24-hour mean of 24.4°C) than in the VS habitat (24-hour mean of 23.8°C).Water oxygen content varied signi cantly be- tween July and August (P < 0.05), but no signi cant differences were observed between the two habitats analyzed (P > 0.05). Oxygen content in the water was signi cantly higher in July than in August. The lowest oxygen content in July was noted at 03:00 hours in the VS habitat (6.7 mg O2 dm-3) and at 06:00 hours in the BR habitat (8.0 mg O2 dm-3). Oxygen content was shown to rise during the daytime hours, with the highest levels recorded in the VS habitat at 15:00 hours (22.7 mg O2 dm-3) and in the BR habitat at 18:00 hours (17.7 mg O2 dm-3). A similar trend was noted in August but only in the VS habitat. Dissolved oxygen content increased starting at 06:00 and peaked at 12:00 (13.7 mg O2 dm-3). Dissolved oxygen content remained constant throughout the day and night in the BR habitat at approximately 7.0 mg O2 dm-3.Cladocera compositionA total of 18 species of Cladocera (Table 1) were identi ed in the littoral zone of Lake Licheńskie in July and August. The number of taxa identi ed in both habitats was the same (15), but the species composition was different. Greater Cladocera spe- cies richness was detected in both habitats in July than in August (P < 0.05).Diel Cladocera density and biomass  uctuated differently for the two habitats analyzed and in both months. Higher Cladocera density and biomass were noted in July than in August (P < 0.05). The density of cladocerans was higher in the VS than in the BR habitat during the research period (P < 0.05). The highest Cladocera densities in the VS habitat in July were recorded at 21:00 hours (596 ind. dm-3) and between 09:00 and 15:00 hours (Fig. 1). Opposite pattern was recorded in BR habitat, with the high- est density at both 06:00 and 18:00 hours (142 and 208 ind. dm-3, respectively). Changes in Cladocera density and biomass followed a very different pat- tern during the second month of the study (Fig. 1). In August, the highest Cladocera densities were re- corded at night (P <0.05). The density of cladocerans was  ve times lower during daytime hours (09:00 – 15:00 hours) than at night in both habitats.The highest Cladocera biomass in the VS habi- tat in July were recorded between 09:00 and 15:00 hours (18.9 mg dm-3, on average) and at 21:00 hours (15.4 mg dm-3) (Fig. 1). Cladocera biomass in the BR habitat was the highest at 15:00 (7.1 mg dm-3). InAugust, in both studied habitats, Cladocera biomass was lower during the daytime than at night time and was seven times lower in the VS habitat (on aver- age 0.27 mg dm-3) and over tenfold lower in the BR habitat (on average 0.08 mg dm-3).Dominant species variationThe three most abundant species in both habitats in July were Ceriodaphnia quadrangu- la (O.F. Müller) (34.1% – VS and 25.1% – BR), Diaphanosoma brachyurum (Liévin) (27.6% – VS and 31.0% – BR), and Pleuroxus aduncus (Jurine) (16.4% – VS and 20.7% – BR). Diel changes in the density of these species in the two habitats studied followed similar patterns (Fig. 2). The decrease in the density of cladocerans found at 06:00 and at 18:00 in the VS habitat was accompanied by a corresponding increase in BR. During the daytime the largest C. quadrangula, D. brachyurum, and P. aduncus densi- ties in the VS habitat were recorded at 09:00 and at 12:00 hours, while the Cladocera density in the BR habitat was the lowest at the same time.In August, the composition of the dominant species changed. The density of the plant-associat- ed species, a previously dominant type among the Cladocera, decreased substantially in both habitats. The new dominant species comprised the open water such as the  lter-feeders Bosmina longirostris var.typica (O.F. Müller) (28.1% – VS; 21.2% – BR), In the BR habitat, a strong correlation was noted be- Bosmina longispina var. seligoi Leydig (15.0% – VS; tween oxygen content and B. longispina var. seligoiFigure 2. Changes in the density and biomass of dominant Cladocera species in the littoral19.5% – BR), and D. brachyurum (16.1% – VS and density.36.9% – BR). The density of the species mentionedzone of Lake Liche skie in the V. spiralis hStatistically signi cant correlations (Table 2) were identi ed in the VS habitat between D. brachy- urum density and time of day and B. longirostris var. typica density and time of day. A statistically signi - cant correlation between B. longirostris var. typica density and water temperature was noted in the VS habitat. The correlation between B. longirostris var. typica density and oxygen content in the VS habitat was strong, although not statistically signi cant (r = -0.668, P = 0.07). Statistically signi cant corre- lations were noted between total Cladocera density and oxygen content in the VS habitat and between total Cladocera biomass and oxygen content. In the VS habitat, a statistically signi cant correlation was identi ed between B. longirostris var. typica density

xdiscussion
Macrophytes play an important role in the shap- ing of the structure of littoral heterogeneity, while species diversity leads to the formation of hetero- geneous micro-habitats that support different types of zooplankton assemblages (Balayla, Moss 2003, KuczyńsKa-Kippen, nagengast 2003). The presence of large macrophyte-covered areas leads to greater habitat diversity compared to that of open waters, and this has a positive impact on zooplankton bio- mass growth (wang et al. 2009). Unlike open wa- ters, the mosaic of littoral habitats supports a very di- verse zooplankton community (KuczyńsKa-Kippen, nagengast 2006). The development of macrophytes reduces water through- ow which helps the process of zooplankton development (Basu et al. 2000). In many lakes, zooplankton organisms undergo DHM into macrophytes (BurKs et al. 2002). Cladocera species, which can  nd optimum habitat conditions in the open water zone during the day, often seek ref- uge from predators among macrophytes (Kairesalo et al. 1998) even though the food conditions there may be less favorable (KuczyńsKa-Kippen 2008). Refuge effectiveness is at its maximum in the sum- mer after dense stands of macrophytes develop in lakes (BurKs et al. 2001, Balayla, Moss 2003). Crustaceans seek refuge among macrophytes dur- ing the daytime in response to especially large num- bers of zooplanktivorous  sh (ryBaK, węgleńsKa 2003). Plant-associated cladocerans are less exposed to predators than those living in open waters since they are less visible to  sh. The effectiveness of macrophytes as a refuge for zooplankton depends on the associated assemblage of predatory macroin- vertebrates and  sh among the plants (gonzález sagrario, Balseiro 2010). Sometimes submerged macrophyte beds do not represent a refuge for zo- oplankton in lakes where predators are numerous among the plants.In the summer of 2004, 92% of the littoral zone of Lake Licheńskie was covered with plant assem- blages dominated by V. spiralis (Hutorowicz 2006), and such a level of dominance by this exotic spe- cies in the littoral zone limited the presence of other macrophyte species. Consequently, this could have led to reduced habitat diversity and species richness within the zooplankton community (paturej et al. 2007). The current study indicated that neither of the habitats analyzed varied in terms of species richness. They did vary in terms of taxonomic composition that stemmed from the different habitat preferences of the taxa identi ed. The large predatory pelagic cladocer- ans Leptodora kindti (Focke) were not found in the VS habitat, nor were the warm-water species Moina micrura Kurz or the mesotrophic species Monospilus dispar Sars, which live near sediments (duigan, BirKs 2000). No plant-associated species were iden- ti ed in the BR habitat such as the stenothermic spe- cies Peracantha truncata (O.F. Müller), Alonella exiqua (Lilljeborg), which prefers mesotrophic wa- ters, or Sida crystallina (O.F. Müller). The latter two species live in the littoral zone of lakes and ponds, preferring habitats covered with macrophytes from the genus Myriophyllum, Ceratophyllum, Elodea, Potamogeton, and Nymphae. Large populations of S. crystallina can be found on stones and detritus as well as on Chara meadows as deep as 5 m or more (Flössner 1972). paturej et al. (2007) analyzed zoo- plankton density and diversity in Lake Licheńskie in 2001-2002 and reported that S. crystallina was noted only occasionally.Three species were dominant in July in both of the habitats: C. quadrangula, P. aduncus, and D. brachyurum. The  rst two species are typical of littoral environments (Flössner 1972). They favor conditions featuring dense plant patches with  oat- ing leaves that are rich in detritus. D. brachyurum despite the fact that they normally inhabit pelagic waters, even so, they can be found in large numbers in plant habitats. Their numbers tended to decline in the morning (06:00) and the evening (18:00) in the VS habitat and increase in the vegetation-free habitat at the same times. The changes in C. quad- rangula, P. aduncus, and D. brachyurum population patterns identi ed suggest the use of V. spiralis as a refuge from zooplanktivorous  sh during both day and night. At dawn and dusk, when  sh are most ac- tive in the littoral zone (Kapusta, BogacKa 2006), the zooplankton species migrate to the BR habitat. While zooplanktivorous  sh feed throughout the pe- lagic zone at night, C. quadrangula and D. brachyu- rum  nd refuge in the VS habitat. In August, the dominant species in both habi- tats were those that are commonly found in open wa- ters in eutrophic lakes: B. longirostris var. typica, B. longispina var. seligoi, and D. brachyurum. In both of the habitats analyzed the densities of these species were the lowest during the day and the highest in the evening and at night. At the point of contact between the littoral and open water environments, cladocer- ans tend to intermingle and migrate horizontally (BurKs et al. 2002, RomaRe et al., 2003).The predatory behavior of zooplanktivorous  sh and the use of macrophytes as a refuge play an im- portant role in the shaping of medium-scale patterns of zooplankton migration and population dynam- ics (Balayla, Moss 2003). Research on cladoceran diel migration patterns in the littoral zone of Lake Licheńskie has shown that plankton organisms are capable of adapting to life among macrophytes, and this type of adaptability plays an important role in cladoceran migration patterns and population dy- namics. The large Cladocera density noted in the VS habitat suggests that the invasive V. spiralis plays an anti-predatory function in Lake Licheńskie. At the same time, the degree of homogeneity noted in the lake littoral zone can limit the diversity of zooplankton to some extent. A littoral zone that is diverse in terms of taxonomic composition provides more types of habitats for more types of zooplankton taxa. In Lake Licheńskie, a lake that is quite homogene- ous in terms of littoral macrophytes, the zooplankton has a limited choice between two types of habitats, that of V. spiralis and the open water zone.
