xabstract
 In soft sediments, Dreissena spp. create firm substrate in the form of aggregates of living
mussels (druses) that roll free on the sediments. Druses provide physical structure which increases
habitat heterogeneity, and the mussels increase benthic organic matter through the production of
pseudofeces and feces. Descriptive and experimental studies were used to determine: 1) whether the
density of benthic invertebrates in soft sediments increased in the presence of druses, and 2) whether
the invertebrate assemblage responded to the physical structure provided by a druse or to some biotic
effect associated with the presence of living mussels. In core samples collected biweekly during
summer in Presque Isle Bay, Erie, Pennsylvania, amphipods, chironomids, oligochaetes, turbellarians,
and hydrozoans were significantly more abundant in sand with druses than in bare sand. When
mesh bags containing either a living druse, non-living druse, or no druse were incubated in the bay
for 33 d, we found that chironomids were significantly more abundant in treatments with living
druses than with non-living druses, and in treatments with non-living druses than with no druse;
turbellarians, amphipods, and hydrozoans were significantly more abundant in treatments with liv-
ing or non-living druses than with no druse; oligochaetes showed no significant differences among
treatments. This study demonstrates that most taxa of benthic invertebrates in soft substrate respond
specifically to the physical structure associated with aggregates of mussel shells, but further study is
needed to examine chironomid responses to some biotic effect dependent on the presence of living mussels.

xintroduction
Zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha) and
quagga mussels (Dreissena bugensis) are charac-
terized by their ability to colonize virtually any
firm surface, given suitable environmental con-
ditions. They create structurally complex masses
of shells and byssal threads (Mellina and Ras-
mussen 1994). The tendency of Dreissena to col-
onize most firm substrates has fouled water in-
take pipes and other submerged structures (Ko-
valak et al. 1993) and increased the number of
benthic invertebrates inhabiting rocky sub-
strates in the Great Lakes (Dermott et al. 1993,
Griffiths 1993, Stewart and Haynes 1994).
Where hard substrate is extensive and zebra
mussels are dense, mussel filtration can reduce
planktonic biomass (MacIsaac et al. 1992). Un-
used particles and nutrients such as N and P
are concentrated in mucus pellets called pseu-
dofeces that, together with feces, accumulate in
and around masses of mussels (Ten Winkel and
Davids 1983, Hamburger et al. 1990, Stafczy-
kowska and Lewandowski 1993).
Where hard substrate is rare, the lack of ap-
propriate settlement sites for metamorphosed
larvae results in smaller mussel populations
(Mellina and Rasmussen 1994). In such habitats,
mussels aggregate to form "druses" when lar-
vae settle onto small pebbles or other hard ob-
jects and new mussels settle on top of older
mussels (Nalepa and Schloesser 1993). Druses
can range in size from 2 cm to more than 10 cm
in diameter and can consist of 10s to 100s of
individuals. Druses are not permanently fixed
to the substrate, but they provide "mobile"
patches of hard substrate consisting of shell sur-
faces and interstices suitable for use by other
benthic organisms.
Planktonic algae and nutrients deposited as
pseudofeces should enhance detritus-based
benthic food webs (Hamburger et al. 1990), but
the relative importance of physical structure
and translocation of planktonic energy to the
benthos can be difficult to sort out in the ab-
sence of manipulative experiments. We hypoth- esized that druses could affect densities of ben-
 thic invertebrates in soft substrate by providing
 increased physical structure (habitable surface)
 or by providing increased resources through
 some biotic mechanism (e.g., pseudofeces pro-
 duction).

xmethods
Study site
Descriptive and experimental studies were
conducted within a single 125-m2 area of the
bottom of Presque Isle Bay, Erie, Pennsylvania.
The study site was off Leo's Landing, a small
peninsula extending from Presque Isle (42?10'N,
80?5'W) into the bay. All descriptive and exper-
imental work was done on bare sand substrate
within 20-30 m of shore in water <0.5 m deep.
Druses, ranging in size from 2 cm to 8 cm in
their widest dimension, were abundant at this
location (>5-10/m2).
Descriptive study
We collected 3 randomly placed core samples
(9 cm diameter x 5 cm deep) of bare sand and
3 randomly placed core samples of sand asso-
ciated with an overlying druse biweekly from 7
June to 17 August 1994. Hand-cored samples
were placed in 1-L plastic jars, preserved in 10%
formalin, and stained with rose bengal. In the
laboratory, each sample was rinsed through a
61-pIm sieve under running water; when a druse
was present, it was broken apart manually and
rinsed over the sieve. We made no attempt to
separate organisms living in a druse from or-
ganisms living in the sand under a druse be-
cause: 1) we could not sample only the sand un-
der a druse without contaminating it with or-
ganisms from the druse and 2) druses are as-
sociated with the underlying substrate rather
than separate from it. Invertebrates were sorted
using sugar flotation under a dissecting micro-
scope at 7x magnification (Anderson 1959). Or-
ganisms were classified to major taxonomic
groups (Amphipoda, Chironomidae, Turbellar-
ia, Oligochaeta, Hydrozoa).
Habitable surface area in samples containing
druses is greater than that in samples of sand
only. In addition, druses with the same diame-
ter may differ markedly in surface area depend-
ing on the sizes and number of individuals in a
particular druse. We were unable to find an ac-
curate method for quantifying the surface area
associated with the druses. To report inverte-
brate abundances consistently, regardless of
sample type, we present all abundances on the
basis of number/m2 bottom surface area rather
than total surface area available in the sample.
Log-transformed data were analyzed using
MANOVA (SAS Version 6.0, SAS Institute, Cary,
NC) using date (5 biweekly events) and treat-
ment (sand vs. sand+druse) as main effects.
Normality was checked with Kolmogorov-Smir-
nov tests, and homoscedasticity was confirmed
with Burr-Foster q tests (Anderson and McLean
1974) for each taxon.
Experimental study
On 15 July 1994, we began an experimental
study using 9 replicates each of 3 zebra mussel
treatments (no mussels, 4-cm-diameter non-liv-
ing druses, and 4-cm-diameter living druses).
We deployed the mussels by sewing them into
flexible 5 cm x 10 cm plastic mesh bags (Dro-
sophila culture bags, Carolina Biological Supply
Co., >1 cm mesh size) attached by short pieces
of monofilament fishing line to wooden stakes.
The stakes were driven into the substrate until
the bags rested on bare sand. Stakes were ran-
domly placed within the study area, and each
was least 2 m from any other. We did not re-
move naturally occurring druses from the study
area. In the case of the "no mussel" treatment,
we used empty bags as a control.
Non-living druses were created by gluing
dried, cleaned zebra mussel shells together with
silicone aquarium sealer. Shell halves were
glued together to create "individuals", and "in-
dividuals" were glued together to create druses
that were approximately 4 cm in diameter. We
were careful to leave interstices between indi-
viduals, and, except for the glue, non-living
druses strongly resembled living druses. Living
and non-living druses were visually indistin-
guishable at the time the experiment was ter-
minated. The silicone sealer was allowed to cure
in air for 1 wk before the beginning of the ex-
periment, and druses were submerged briefly in
lake water prior to deployment to remove air
bubbles from the interstices and the pockets
formed when shell halves were glued together.
Living druses were collected from the site at
the time of deployment. They were rinsed in  lake water prior to insertion into the mesh bags,
 but we made no systematic attempt to remove
 all existing epi- or intrafauna on living druses
 as this would have resulted in destruction of the
 living druse. Although non-living and living
 druses were similar in overall size (-4 cm in
 diameter), we did not control surface area, in-
 terstitial volume, or numbers and sizes of indi-
 viduals in a druse.
 Bags and their contents were exposed to col-
 onizers for 33 d. Each bag was retrieved by clip-
 ping its monofilament line and slipping a 9-cm-
 diameter corer over it as it rested on the sub-
 strate. The corer was pressed 5 cm into the sand,
 and the bag, its contents, and the sand under it
 were collected. All samples were preserved and
 processed as previously described, except that
 10 randomly selected chironomid larvae from
 each sample were mounted in CMCP-9 for iden-
 tification to genus using the keys in Wiederholm
 (1983).
 Data were analyzed using MANOVA (SAS
 Version 6.0) using treatment as the main effect.
 All abundances were converted to number/m2
 bottom surface area and log-transformed to
 meet normality and homoscedasticity assump-
 tions. Differences among treatments were deter-
 mined using a posteriori Student-Newman-
 Keuls tests. Relative abundances of the 5 most
 abundant chironomid genera were compared
 using arcsin-transformed data and separate 1-
 way ANOVAs with o = 0.01 to adjust for mul-
 tiple tests of significance

xresults
Descriptive study
Mean abundances of benthic invertebrates in
all major taxonomic groups were higher in sand
with druses than in bare sand (Wilk's lambda
= 0.0469, p < 0.001, Fig. 1). Amphipods, chi-
ronomids, and oligochaetes were 2-3X more
abundant, and turbellarians and hydrozoans
were 10-20x more abundant when druses were
present.
Invertebrate abundances increased as the
summer progressed (Wilk's lambda = 0.0099, p
< 0.0001, Table 1). Although amphipods, oli-
gochaetes, and turbellarians increased, no
change in hydrozoan abundance was detected.
Chironomid abundances increased between 7
June and 23 June, but showed no further
changes during the summer.
Mean abundances of invertebrates were af-
fected by an interaction between date and type
of substrate (Wilk's lambda = 0.0563, p <
0.0007). Amphipod and turbellarian abun-
dances increased more rapidly in sand with
druses than in bare sand, but no such interac-
tion affected chironomid or oligochaete abun-
dances. Hydrozoan abundances were temporal-
ly variable on both types of substrate, but they
fluctuated more in sand with druses.
Invertebrates were not uniformly distributed
in the study site; rather, they had a patchy dis-
tribution across two types of habitat: bare sand  and sand with druses. Assuming a density of
 10 druses/m2, we calculated a weighted average
 abundance of invertebrates in the sediments
 based on the mean abundance of invertebrates
 in bare sand (11,860/m2, 96% of the substrate)
 and in druse-associated sand (38,766/m2, 4% of
 the substrate) for the summer. The mean patch-
 weighted abundance of invertebrates for the en-
 tire habitat was 12,937/m2.
 Experimental study
 Invertebrate abundances differed among
 treatments (Wilk's lambda = 0.1304, p < 0.0001,
 Fig. 2). Chironomids were more abundant in bags containing living iving druses, and less abun-
 dant in empty bags. Amphipods, turbellarians,
 and hydrozoans were more abundant in bags
 containing either living or non-living druses
 than in empty bags, but abundances did not dif-
 fer between bags containing living and non-liv-
 ing druses. Oligochaete abundances were simi-
 lar in all treatments.
 Taxonomic composition of chironomids was
 similar in all three treatments (Fig. 3). Pseudo-
 chironomus sp. and Stictochironomus sp. were the
 more abundant taxa in all treatments. Other
 taxa that made up more than 2% of the chiron-
 omids present in at least one treatment were
 Cladotanytarsus mancus group, Cryptochiron  sp., and Orthocladius s. str. We detected no sig-
 nificant differences in relative abundances of
 any chironomid genus among treatments (p >
 0.05 for all taxa).

xdiscussion
In the Laurentian Great Lakes, total inverte-
brate abundances have increased, and species
compositions have shifted, following coloniza-
tion of hard substrata by zebra mussels (Der-
mott et al. 1993, Griffiths 1993, Stewart and
Haynes 1994). Investigators have assumed that
invertebrates responded either to physical struc-
ture provided by the mussels or to biotic effects
such as organic enrichment resulting from pseu-
dofeces production. Our study in soft substrate
extends the understanding of mechanisms be-
hind the changes by demonstrating experimen-
tally that, at least in Presque Isle Bay, most in-
vertebrate taxa respond to the physical structure
rather than to biotic effects.
Following manipulation of invertebrate as-
semblages in a Chernobyl cooling pond, Step-
nev et al. (1994) reported that species composi-
tion and invertebrate abundances were similar
on live mussels and mussel analogues. In our
study, the similar responses of amphipods, tur-
bellarians, and hydrozoans to living and non-
living druses suggest that the structure of the
druse influences these taxa more strongly than
biotic effects associated with living mussels. The
implication of this influence is that, even if mas-
sive mussel die-off were to occur (assuming no
serious oxygen depletion associated with the de-
composition of dead mussels), increased abun-
dances of invertebrates could persist in the pres-
ence of shell habitat left by zebra mussels.
The design of our experimental study result-
ed in 2 important artifacts that may have influ-
enced invertebrate abundances. First, the stakes
and mesh bags provided structure beyond that
of the enclosed mussels. Second, we increased
spatial predictability and decreased physical
disturbance on experimental druses by "teth-
ering" druses on the same patch of sand for a
month. We cannot evaluate the effect of tether-
ing druses in this experiment, but the structural
influence of stakes and bags can be seen by
comparing invertebrate abundances in empty
bags (Fig. 2, Experimental study) with those in
bare sand on 17 August (Table 1, Descriptive
study). The samples were collected on the same
day, but abundances of all taxa were higher in
empty bags than in bare sand. We suggest that
invertebrates increased in response to the struc-
ture associated with the stakes and bags used
in the experimental study. The response was
particularly marked for oligochaetes. Despite
their strong preference for druses in the descrip-
tive study (Fig. 1), oligochaete abundances did
not differ among experimental treatments (Fig.
2). Oligochaetes may have responded so strong-
ly to the structure provided by stakes and bags
that we were unable to detect any additional
responses to druses.
The statement often has been made that zebra  mussels enhance benthic invertebrate abun-
 dances through production of pseudofeces, but
 no critical tests of this assertion have been made
 until now. On the basis of our experimental
 study, we conclude that amphipods, turbellari-
 ans, oligochaetes, and hydrozoans respond to
 the physical structure of druses. We found no
 evidence of a numerical response of these taxa
 to biotic effects, which would include pseudo-
 feces production. For chironomids, on the other
 hand, we have shown that abundance can in-
 crease significantly in response to biotic effects.
 Because larvae could use pseudofeces either as
 food or as building material during case con-
 struction, we suggest that future work should
 focus on pseudofeces as an important resource
 for chironomids.
