xabstract
Invasive predators can have large negative effects on native prey populations. The susceptibility of native prey to invasive predators may depend on their ability to respond behaviorally to the presence of these non-native predators. In a field survey conducted in Lake Michigan over several years, we found that high densities of the invasive predatory cladoceran Bythotrephes were correlated with lower vertical distributions of some species and age classes of native copepods; moving from inhabiting primarily the epiliminion at low Bythotrephes density to primarily the hypolimnion at high Bythotrephes density. Five groups showed this pattern; diaptomid copepodites, adult cyclopoids, Diacyclops thomasi, and the adult diaptomids Leptodiaptomus ashlandi and L. minutus. In contrast, Bythotrephes density was not correlated with the vertical distribution of copepod nauplii and adult L. sicilis. Laboratory experiments suggest that the changes in the vertical distribution in the field at high Bythothrephes are due to an inducible, plastic response to predation threat from Bythotrephes signaled by water-borne cues. Species that were lower in the field at high Bythotrephes densities responded behaviorally to water-borne cues from Bythotrephes by moving to lower levels of experimental water columns. These species included D. thomasi and L. minutus, with L. ashlandi displaying a non-significant trend in the same direction. In contrast, L. sicilis, which was not correlated with Bythotrephes density in the field, was unaffected by the water-borne cues. Differences in vertical distribution shifts among these native copepod species and life-history stages are likely due to species- specific differences in spatial overlap with Bythotre- phes and their relative ability to migrate large distances or employ alternative avoidance strategies. The varied responses exhibited among the copepod groups likely alter their interactions with each other, their resources and other predators, thus revealing the complex effects Bythotrephes can have on invaded communities.


xintroduction
Invasive species are a major threat to native biodi- versity (Soule 1990; Vitousek et al. 1996, 1997) causing or contributing to the declines of numer- ous native species across the globe (Mack et al.2000; Gurevitch and Padilla 2004; Clavero and Garcia-Berthou 2005). Invasive predators in particu- lar, have had large negative impacts on native prey populations (Mack et al. 2000; Kats and Ferrer 2003; Salo et al. 2007). The effects of predators on prey, and indirect effects of predators on species that prey interact with, can be strongly influenced and even dominated by predator-induced changes in prey behavior (Abrams 1992; Werner and Peacor 2003). For example, predators have been shown to have large effects on prey and the prey’s resource if the prey responds to the predator by reducing foraging activity or shifting its habitat use (Werner and Peacor 2003). Such ‘‘nonconsumptive effects’’ (NCEs) of the pred- ator hinge on the prey species’ ability to perceive and behaviorally respond to the risk of predator presence. However, it is not clear if native prey species will perceive and respond appropriately to an invasive predator given the short history of interaction (Cox and Lima 2006; Sih et al. 2010). Therefore, to understand the role of NCEs and accurately predict the overall impact of invasive predators we need a better under- standing of their effects on the behavior of native prey.In pelagic communities, many zooplankton species respond to the presence of predators by altering their vertical position in the water column in order to reduce predation risk (Lass and Spaak 2003; Cohen and Forward 2009). However, due to intrinsic tradeoffs (Abrams 1992; Werner and Peacor 2003), induced behavioral responses are associated with costs such as reduced growth rate (Loose and Dawidowicz 1994). For example, induced vertical migration can result in zooplankton experiencing lower temperatures with a subsequent marked decrease in individual growth and reproduction rates (Loose and Dawidowicz 1994; Pangle and Peacor 2010).The invasive predatory cladoceran Bythotrephes longimanus may be impacting native prey assemblages through such a mechanism in the Great Lakes, where it was introduced over 20 years ago (Bur et al. 1986). For example, in Lake Michigan, Daphnia inhabit deeper strata at higher Bythotrephes biomass (Pangle et al. 2007), and in the laboratory Daphnia lowers its vertical position in the water column and grows less in response to water-borne cues from Bythotrephes (Pangle and Peacor 2006). Another cladoceran, Bosmina longiros- tris, also shows a lower vertical distribution in the field at high Bythotrephes density (Pangle et al. 2007). Population growth models indicate that NCEs play alarge role in the net effect of Bythotrephes on Daphnia population growth rates in the field; potentially even greater than consumptive effects in some circum- stances (Pangle et al. 2007). To fully understand and predict the influence of Bythotrephes we must under- stand if it has similar effects on other ecologically important Great Lakes zooplankton.Copepods are a diverse group of zooplankton that play important roles in the Great Lakes pelagic food web as consumers of phytoplankton and other zooplantkon (Warren 1983; Carrick et al. 1991; Liebig and Vanderploeg 1995), and as critical food resources for many fish species (Miller et al. 1990; Bremigan et al. 2003). Here we examine the impact of Bythtotrephes on pelagic communities in the Great Lakes by conducting a comprehensive study of the anti-predator behavioral responses by different age classes of several common copepod species native to the Great Lakes. Understanding how Bythotrephes affects the behavior and distribution of copepods will provide us not only with information about the direct effects of this invasive predator on native copepods, but also shed light on the potential indirect effects of Bythotrephes on other members of the pelagic community. A novel aspect of our approach is that it considers the effects of an invasive predator on several different species and life-history stages. Such a comprehensive approach may be necessary if we are to fully understand the impacts of the invasive Bythotrephes in the Great Lakes and elsewhere, and, more generally, the potential effects of invasive predators in complex communities.

xmethods
We implemented field surveys and laboratory exper- iments to examine the effect of Bythotrephes abun- dance on the vertical distribution of native copepods in Lake Michigan. First, we surveyed the distribution of copepods during the day to determine if copepods were lower in the water column when the visual predator Bythotrephes is actively feeding. Occupying the darker lower regions of the water column essentially acts as a refuge for copepods from Bythotrephes predation. We focus on the daytime distribution for logistical reasons, and because we expected that any response to Bythotrephes would be largest in the day. We further conducted laboratory experiments to determine whether potential changes in vertical position by copepods are an inducible plastic response to water-borne chemical cues from Bythotephes.Field surveyThe field survey was performed over a range locations and dates in order to span spatial and temporal variation in Bythotrephes density. We surveyed two established stations, M45 and M110 (45 and 110 m depths, respectively), in Lake Michigan near Muske- gon MI, in 2004–2007. These surveys were performed in July before Bythotrephes is established, in mid- August at high Bythotrephes density, and at the end of August when Bythotrephes density is lowered (pre- sumably due to increased predation from adult ale- wives, Alosa pseudoharengus) at the 45-m site, but not at the 110-m site (Fig. 1). Each site was sampled twice a month from July through August and once in October, for a total of 7 samples at each survey location.We performed zooplankton sampling by filtering lake water through a 64-lm-mesh net using a diaphragm pump system. Samples consisted of 1 m3 of lake water taken from the centers of the epilim- nion, metalimnion and from the hypolimnion, 10 m below the bottom of the metalimnion. The thermal structure of the water column was identified using a submersible sensor prior to each sampling event.Prior to counting zooplankton, we sub-sampled each zooplankton sample with a Henson-Stempler pipette. We sub-sampled until we counted at least 600 individuals in a sample. Adult and copepodite cope- pods were identified to species and family, respec- tively. For all samples, Bythotrephes biomass was calculated using a length-mass relationship (Yan and Pawson 1998). Bythotrephes lengths were measured using a drawing tube and digitizer (Roff and Hofcroft 1986).Laboratory experimentsGeneral experimental protocolIn 2009 and 2010 we conducted laboratory experi- ments to help understand potential patterns found in the field surveys. In particular, the laboratory exper- iments examined whether copepods perceive water- borne chemical cues from Bythotrephes and respond by changing their position in the water column. Weexamined the response of all of the common adult copepods found in our field surveys (D. thomasi, L. ashlandi, L. minutus and L. sicilis). Our approach was modeled after that of the ‘‘plankton organ’’ of Loose and Dawidowicz (1994). In general, the experiments were designed to evaluate the effect of water-borne chemical cues from Bythotrephes on the vertical position of copepods in clear acrylic col- umns. This approach has been used successfully to explore predator-induced vertical migration of zoo- plankton (Loose and Dawidowicz 1994; Pijanowska 1997; van Gool and Ringelberg 1998); many species modify their vertical distribution in response to predator cues in this experimental venue in a manner analogous to that observed in the field.Each experiment was set up using a similar protocol. Water used in the experimental columns was Lake Michigan water collected at the same location as the zooplankton, that had been passed through a 0.64-lm filter and aged at room temperature over a 7–14-d period, a sufficient duration for breakdown of pre- existing predator cues (Loose et al. 1993). To create Bythotrephes cue water (density, 8 Bythotrephes L-1), individual Bythotrephes were incubated in control water in separate 200-mL containers for a 24-h period. The control water used in the experiment was main- tained under similar condition with no Bythotrephes added. Two hours prior to the experiment, Bythotre- phes were removed from each container, and Bytho- trephes water and control water passed through a 64-lm filter to remove any debris. An aquarium acted as a water bath, and water temperature was regulated using external chiller units. The water bath was cooled to create a vertical temperature gradient of approxi- mately 12–22°C from the bottom of the aquarium to the surface of the water. The columns were illuminated by diffused light from directly above using 50 W halogen bulbs. Light intensity was kept constant over the duration of the experiment, with a photon flux density of 16.0 lEinst m-2 at the top of the column, and 4.0 lEinst m-2 at the bottom.Copepods used in the experiment were collected by vertical net tow at 40 m depth at the 110 m site where surveys were performed. Within 4 h of being collected, 100 live individuals were removed from the sample, transferred into 4 L of control water, and placed in an incubator at 20°C. At the start of each experiment, the copepods were transferred with a wide bore pipette into 60-cm tall, 18-mm diameter, clear acrylic columns that were filled with experi- mental water (e.g., water with predator cue and control water, see below) and submerged vertically in a transparent aquarium. Copepods were allowed to acclimate to experimental conditions 1 h prior to the observations.The vertical position of all copepods in each column was recorded at timed intervals (every 20 min) over a defined time period (from 2 to 4 h). To quantify the vertical position of copepods the columns were demarcated in 10-cm intervals. The number of copepods counted in each interval in each column was averaged over the experimental obser- vations. We used three response variables: (1) the average interval occupied by copepods in a column (this metric is nearly equivalent to the average height occupied in the column by the copepod) and the proportion of copepods in the (2) upper and (3) lower extremes (e.g., upper or lower 10 cm) of the column.Specific experimentsIn 2009 and 2010 we conducted laboratory experi- ments to test the effects of Bythotrephes cues on the vertical position of four species of adult copepods, D. thomasi, L. ashlandi, L. minutus and L. sicilis, in daytime light conditions. For D. thomasi, L. ashlandiand L. minutus, a simple single factor design, with presence/absences of Bythotrephes cue as the exper- imental treatment, was used. Six, five and ten replicate columns, and three, one and three individuals per column, were used in the D. thomasi, L. ashlandi and L. minutus experiments, respectively. Bythotrephes cue water was used directly after preparation for the experiments with D. thomasi and L. ashlandi. How- ever, due to limited availability of fresh Bythotrephes cue at the time of the experiment, we used cue that was frozen for 1 week prior to the experiment and thawed immediately before delivery to the experimental columns in the L. minutus experiment. This preparation has no effect on cue activity relative to freshly prepared cue (Pangle, unpublished data).Because field observations and an initial labora- tory experiment (not reported here) indicated that L. sicilis do not respond to Bythotrephes cues, we used an experimental design that included a treat- ment with Daphnia in the experiment and compared its response to Bythotrephes cues to the response by L. sicilis. Daphnia have previously been shown to respond to Bythotrephes by lowering their position in the water column. Thus Daphnia was used as a bioassay to test if the chemical cue was present, and therefore strengthen any conclusion that a lack of response by L. sicilis was ‘real’ rather than procedural artefact. The factor ‘species’ (L. sicilis and Daphnia) was crossed with the experimental treatment, presence or absence of Bythotrephes cues, in a factorial design. We used seven replicate columns for each species by treatment combination, with 3 individuals per column. Daphnia and L. sicilis were put in different columns. Bythotrephes cue was used directly after preparation. Statistical design and analysesField surveyTo examine the vertical position of copepod species and age classes (hereafter ‘group’) in relation to Bythotrephes biomass, we first calculated the propor- tion of individual copepods in the epilimnion, meta- limnion and hypolimnion from each sample from our field survey data. To avoid stochastic fluctuations in the proportion of individuals within a depth stratum associated with small sample size, we performed two analyses: one where we restricted our analyses of samples to those that had estimated densities of a given group that were at least 10 individuals/m2 and a second, more conservative analysis of only samples that had estimated densities of a given group that were at least 100 individuals/m2. As both analyses revealed the same significant and non-significant relationships for each copepod group, we only report the results from the analyses using the 10-individuals/m2 crite- rion. We conducted simple linear regression on the relationship between arcsine square-root-transformed vertical position proportions for each copepod group and log-transformed Bythotrephes biomass.We also calculated a depth metric for each copepod group from the proportion data to facilitate comparison of changes in vertical distribution among copepod groups. We calculated the depth metric by multiplying 1, 0, and -1 to the proportion of individuals in the epilimnion, metalimnion, and hypolimnion, respec- tively, and then summing the products ((1 * proportion in epilimnion) ? (0 * proportion in metalimnion) ? (-1 * proportion in hypolimnion)). Thus copepods were considered higher in the water column (i.e., greater proportion in the epilimnion) if the depth metric was positive and lower in the water column (i.e., greater proportion in the hypolimnion) when the depth metric was negative. We then analyzed among-speciesdepth metric variation with analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with group as a fixed factor and log- transformed Bythotrephes biomass as a covariate.Laboratory experimentsThe response variables from the laboratory experi- ments were examined for normality and homogeneity of variance using Lillifore’s test and Bartlett’s test respectively, and we transformed the data if they deviated significantly from assumed distributions. We did not transform interval data as it met the assump- tions of normality and homoscedasticity, but arcsine- square root transformed proportion in upper and lower extreme data, as the raw proportions violated both assumptions.For each experiment we used a randomized block design; each of the treatments or treatment combina- tions were represented in spatial blocks, with a full complement of each treatment combination aligned side by side within each block. We analyzed response variables using single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) following the general linear model testing main effects within blocks. For the experiment with L. sicilis we analyzed response variables using 2-way ANOVA, testing main effects and their interaction within blocks. Because there were no individuals in the upper 10 cm of the column in this experiment we used the upper 20 cm of the column as the ‘upper extreme’ for this analyses. If interaction terms were significant, we followed up 2-way ANOVA with post-hoc 1-way ANOVAs of simple effects. All statistical analyses were done in R.

xresults
Field surveyFrom 2004 to 2007, Bythotrephes reached their peak abundance at the 45 m site by the end of July, but were rare in samples in August (Fig. 1a). Copepods, particularly cyclopoid and diaptomid copepodites, and adult L. ashlandi and L. minutus reached their peak abundance in mid-July, just prior to the appearance of Bythotrephes (Fig. 1b). These four groups declined in abundance toward the end of July as Bythotrephes abundance began to increase. Nauplii and L. sicilis abundances followed similar trends over the sampling period but were relatively low by comparison. In contrast, Diacyclops thomasi reached peak abundance in late July, corresponding with the peak abundance of Bythotrephes (Fig. 1b). Bythotre- phes reached peak abundance earlier in July and in general, remained abundant for longer at the 110 m site (Fig. 1c). Copepods at the 110 m site showed similar trends in abundance over time to the 45 m site, but were generally less abundant (Fig. 1d).Bythotrephes abundance had a significant effect on the vertical distribution of five of the seven groups we surveyed in the field. Cyclopoid and diaptomid copepodites and adult D. thomasi, L. ashlandi and L. minutus were less abundant in the epilimnion at greater Bythotrephes biomass (Fig. 2). Three of these five, D. thomasi, diaptomid copepodites, and L. ashlandi, were also more abundant in the hypo- limnion at greater Bythotrephes densities, with a trend in this direction for the other two, cyclopoid copepodites and L. minutus (Fig. 2; Table 1). In contrast, adult L. sicilis and copepod nauplii showed no significant relationship between vertical position in the epilimnion or hypolimnion and Bythotrephes biomass (Fig. 2; Table 1).Analysis of the depth metric indicated that the effect of Bythotrephes biomass on copepod depth depended on copepod group (ANCOVA, covari- ate 9 group interaction; F5, 125 = 4.60, P \ 0.001). Five of the seven groups of copepods that we examined, including cyclopoid and diaptomid copepo- dites and adult D. thomasi, L. ashlandi and L. minutus, exhibited negative slopes for the relationship between the depth metric and Bythotrephes biomass, indicating a shift from a greater relative proportion of individuals in the epilimnion at low Bythotrephes biomass to a greater relative proportion of individuals in the hypolimnion at high Bythotrephes biomass. A com- parison of the slopes among those groups that shifted to lower depths at high Bythotrephes biomass indi- cated that the effect of Bythotrephes on the change in depth was not significantly different among copepod groups (all pair wise P [ 0.05). Two groups, L. sicilis and copepod nauplii, showed no change in depth across the range of Bythotrephes biomass examined. Thus the significant interaction term was driven by L. sicilis and copepod nauplii whose slopes were significantly different from the other groups (all pair wise P \ 0.05).Laboratory experimentsIn the laboratory experiments, Bythotrephes cues affected the vertical position of some species, but not others. Bythotrephes cues led to a reduction in the vertical position of D. thomasi (Fig. 3a), as revealed by a decrease in the average interval, (ANOVA, F1, 5 = 22.37, P = 0.005), a reduction in the proportion in the upper extreme (ANOVA, F1, 18 = 12.23, P = 0.02) and an increase in the proportion in the lower extreme (ANOVA, F1, 18 = 15.24, P = 0.01) of the columns. Bythotrephes cues also led to a reduction in the vertical position of Leptodiaptomus minutus (Fig. 3), also with significant effects on all three metrics (average interval, ANOVA, F1, 8 = 8.33, P = 0.01; upper extreme, ANOVA, F1, 8 = 5.48, P = 0.03; lower extreme, F1, 8 = 9.68, P \ 0.01; Fig. 3i). Bythotrephes cues did not significantly affect the average interval of L. ashlandi, although there was a non-significant trend (ANOVA, F1, 8 = 3.65, P = 0.09; Fig. 3d). In contrast, Bythotrephes cues had no effect on the vertical position of L. sicilis. We found a significant species-by-treatment interaction for average interval (ANOVA, F1, 12 = 7.27, P = 0.01; Fig. 3j), which resulted from a negative effect on Daphnia (post-hoc 1-way ANOVA, P \ 0.05) but no effect on L. sicilis (post-hoc 1-way ANOVA, P [ 0.05). In addition, Bythotrephes affected the proportion of zooplankton in the upper extreme of the column (ANOVA, treatment; F1, 12 = 5.19, P = 0.04; Fig. 3k), but this was due to the response by Daphnia (ANOVA, species: F1, 12 = 5.19, P = 0.04) and not of L. sicilis (post-hoc 1-way ANOVA, P [ 0.05). There was a marginally signifi- cant species-by-treatment interaction for proportion of individuals in the lower extreme (ANOVA, F1, 12 = 3.89, P = 0.06). Thus, the effect of Bytotrephes cue differed between Daphnia and L. sicilis; increasing the proportion of Daphnia in the lower extreme (post- hoc 1-way ANOVA, P \ 0.05; Fig. 3l), but having no effect on the proportion of L. sicilis in the lower extreme (post-hoc 1-way ANOVA, P [ 0.05; Fig. 3l).

xdiscussion
In general, Bythotrephes abundance had strong effects on the vertical distribution of several native copepod species in Lake Michigan. Groups found in the upper strata in Lake Michigan in the absence of Bythotrephes, including cyclopoid copepodites, dia- ptomid copepodites and adults of the cyclopoid D. thomasi and the diaptomids L. ashlandi, and L. minutus, were found in lower strata at high Bythotrephes abundance. Nauplii and adult L. sicilis deviated from this pattern; exhibiting no changes in their vertical distribution at high and low Bythotre- phes density. The laboratory experiments corrobo- rated the hypothesis that the distributional shifts observed in the field are due to a plastic behavioral response induced by water-borne cues from Bytho- trephes. In the laboratory, Bythotrephes induced D. thomasi, L. minutus, and to a lesser extent L. ashlandi to lower their vertical position in experimental columns. All three of these speciesshowed strong downward shifts in vertical distribu- tion with increasing Bythotrephes abundance in the field. In contrast, Bythotrephes cues did not induce a change in vertical distribution in the laboratory by L. sicilis, a species that showed no distributional shifts with increasing Bythotrephes abundance in the field. Consistency between the field and laboratory results suggest that Bythotrephes are altering the daytime distribution of native copepods in Lake Michigan, by inducing copepods to inhabit a lower position in the water column; such behavioral responses will reduce spatial overlap with Bythotre- phes, thereby decreasing encounter rates with this visual predator, which generally inhabits the upper and middle strata (i.e., epi- and metalimnion) of Lake Michigan (Pangle and Peacor 2009). A potential alternative hypothesis for Bythotre- phes’ effect on the vertical distribution of copepods in the field could be differential predation rates in different strata. Bythotrephes consume prey at higher rates in high light (Pangle and Peacor 2009) and so will have a larger effect on copepod abundance in the upper strata. However, whereas this mechanism may contribute, we do not believe it can account for the large difference observed. First, we would expect this mechanism to lead to a decrease in absolute abun- dance of copepods in the epilimnion and no change in the absolute abundance of copepods in the hypolim- nion. However, our survey data indicated that the absolute abundance of copepods in the epilimnion in Lake Michigan during the day did not change with Bythotrephes biomass, and the absolute abundance of some copepods in the hypolimnion remained constant while others actually increased (Pangle, unpublisheddata). This pattern is inconsistent with loss due to Bythotrephes consumption. Second, diel vertical migration, where copepods avoid the epilimnion during the day and move back up at night, has been observed for some of the copepod species in this study in both the lab and field (Bourdeau et al. unpublished data), strengthening the hypothesis that Bythotrephes-induced behavioral shifts in vertical distribution, rather than consumptive effects of Bytothrephes, is driving the changes in daytime vertical distribution of copepods in Lake Michigan.Predation by Bythotrephes could also select for fixed rather than inducible behavioral responses by copepods in the field. As Bythotrephes increase in abundance over the course of the season, increasing predation pressure on copepods high in the water column would select for copepods that position themselves lower in the water column, increasing the proportion of individuals in the hypolimnion at higher Bythotrephes as observed for D. thomasi, L. ashlandi, and L. minutus. By examining the response of these three species to Bythotrephes cues in the laboratory we can rule out selection for a fixed response in D. thomasi and L. minutus, and to a lesser extent L. ashlandi, as these species lower their vertical position to Bythotrephes cues in the lab.Lastly, if fish abundance is positively correlated with Bythotrephes abundance, it may be avoidance from fish, rather than Bythotrephes, that led to the observed patterns on copepod vertical distribution. However, two lines of evidence counter this hypoth- esis. First, planktivorous fish density and Bythotre- phes biomass were not positively correlated in Lake Michigan during the years we conducted our surveys (log Bythotrephes biomass:log fish density: R2 = 0.031, P = 0.7404; Y = 1.345-0.067 * X; Appen- dix; Fig. 4). Secondly, in contrast to Bythotrephes abundance, fish abundance has been shown to vary little during our sampling season (June–September) in offshore regions of Lake Michigan (Brandt et al. 1991). Thus if fish were responsible for inducing changes in the daytime vertical distribution of copepods, we would not see the strong association between copepod vertical distribution and Bythotre- phes abundance that we observed during our study.Differences in the behavioral responses to Bytho- trephes among native copepods could be due to a number of factors including: size-related vulnerability, the degree of vertical overlap with Bythotrephes, the availability of alternative predator-avoidance strate- gies, physical limitations on the ability to move over large vertical distances, or differences in shared evolutionary history with Bythotrephes or similar predators (e.g., ‘ghost of predators past’). Our data are consistent with size-related vulnerability influenc- ing differences in the effect of Bythotrephes on copepod vertical distribution because adults of the three smaller species, D. thomasi, L. ashlandi, and L. minutus, all exhibited changes in vertical distribu- tion in the field and in the laboratory, while the adults of the largest species, L. sicilis, did not. However, while prey species often compensate for size-related vulner- ability to predators with stronger antipredator behav- iors (DeWitt et al. 1999), among-species differences copepod behavior are unlikely related to size-vulner- ability to Bythotrephes predation. This is because Bythotrephes feeds by shredding its prey and thus it isnot gape-limited like other invertebrate planktivores, for which larger prey sizes would reduce capture success. In addition, Bythotrephes feeds readily on itself and Daphnia pulicaria, which are both relatively large-bodied cladocerans (Pichlova ́-Pta ́cˇn ́ıkova ́ and Vanderploeg 2011). Thus copepod size per se is unlikely to influence vulnerability to Bythotrephes and hence, would not necessarily predict their behavioral avoidance responses to this predator.The degree of spatial overlap with Bythotrephes may contribute to among-species differences in behav- ioral responses to Bythotrephes in Lake Michigan. All of the species in the study exhibit some diurnal migration towards the surface during the summer months (Balcer et al. 1984; Torke 2001) increasing the likelihood of encounters with Bythotrephes. However, the three species that shifted their vertical distribution to lower portions of the water column at high Bythotrephes biomasses (L. ashlandi, L. minutus and D. thomasi) are generally distributed at or above the thermocline during the summer months, making them particularly likely to encounter Bythotrephes. In con- trast, the species which did not respond to Bythotre- phes, L. sicilis, tends to be distributed lower in the water column than the other three copepod species (Balcer et al. 1984; Torke 2001). The lower vertical distribution of L. sicilis in the water column may reduce spatial overlap with Bythotrephes and thus encounter rates with this predator. Since it is already deeper in the water column, L. sicilis may not need to lower its vertical position much to avoid regular encounters with Bythotrephes. Furthermore, even if Bythotrephes does encounter L. sicilis in deeper water, it may be difficult for this visual predator to detect and capture its prey, thus reducing selective pressure for a behavioral response or precluding the necessity of vertical re-positioning by L. sicilis.An alternative hypothesis for why L. sicilis did not change its vertical position in response to Bythotrephes in the field and in the laboratory is that this species responds behaviorally to predators in other ways. Leptodiaptomus sicilis are known to modify their local (e.g., non-vertical) movement patterns (De Meester et al. 1999), and such movements may represent alternative avoidance strategies to vertical re-position- ing. For example, in the presence of another predator (the copepod Limnocalanus macrurus) L. sicilis exhibits ‘crypsis’, swimming more slowly with less hopping and jumping (Ramcharan and Sprules 1991). Similarly, a strategy of foraging less during the day in the presence of visual predators to reduce the size of their conspicuous gut (Cieri and Stearns 1999) may also be available to L. sicilis. If these alternative behaviors, which only require small-scale movements, decrease vulnerability to predators in general, they may be an effective behavioral defense against Bytho- trephes, negating the need to employ potentially more-costly long-distance vertical migration. Further experiments are needed to determine whether cope- pods employ alternative behaviors in response to this invasive predator.Physical constraints on swimming ability may also have influenced Bythotrephes effects on copepod vertical distribution. Because of their small size, nauplii have slower swimming speeds (Gerritsen 1978), and are less active swimmers than copepodites and adult copepods, and often exhibit passive accu- mulation into the turbidity maximum zone like suspended particles (Castel and Veiga 1990; Roman et al. 2001). As such, behaviorally mediated changes in vertical distribution are generally more common in late copepodite stages and adult copepods than in nauplii (Landry 1978; Ueda 1987). Such ontogenetic differences in swimming ability may account for the lack of effect of Bythotrephes on the vertical positioning of nauplii in Lake Michigan, despite the fact that they are a readily consumed prey item for Bythotrephes (Vanderploeg et al. 1993).Whether differences in behavioral shifts in vertical position among native copepods represent adaptive responses to cues specific of Bythotrephes risk remains an open question. Species that responded to Bythotrephes in the field and in the laboratory are potential prey for Bythotrephes and the most likely to encounter this predator in the upper lake strata, suggesting, at the very least, that a change in vertical position in response to Bythotrephes would be bene- ficial. However, these responses may not be adapta- tions to Bythotrephes per se. For example, species subject to past selection for antipredator behavior will retain that behavior if it is not too costly (e.g., ‘the ghost of predators past’ hypothesis, Peckarsky and Penton 1988). Thus copepods could be responding to Bythotrephes due to selection imposed by prior contact with this predator. To our knowledge, Lepto- diaptomus are found only in the New World and therefore are unlikely to have had any previous exposure to Bythotrephes in the Great Lakes,however, Diacyclops is a cosmopolitan genus (Pennak 1978) and may have had an ancestor that existed with Bythotrephes in the past, or may have hybridized with a European Diacyclops species that may have been recently introduced to Lake Michigan. Differences in the evolutionary histories of Diacyclops and Lepto- diaptomus could indicate different ultimate causes underlying the behavioral responses of these two genera to Bythotrephes.Copepods could also be responding to Bythotrephes due to selection imposed by functionally similar predators. Like most prey, copepods are often exposed to multiple predators in nature, thus the presence of a single predator may be sufficient to explain the persistence of antipredator behavior—even for for- merly present predators (Blumstein et al. 2004). The Great Lakes have two native species of raptorial predatory cladocerans, Leptodora kintii and Polyphe- mus pediculus. The populations of native copepods in our study will have had a longer shared evolutionary history with these two native predators than with Bythotrephes. It is possible that during this time native copepods may have evolved a similar behavioral response to these predators like the one we observed in the presence of Bythotrephes. If the water-borne chemical cues released by Bythotrephes that copepods are responding to are similar among all predatory cladocerans, then the responses we observed might have evolved not in response to selection by Bytho- trephes per se, but to one or both of the native predators or an ancestor common to all predatory cladocerans. Regardless of the mechanism underlying the observed behavioral shifts, some native copepods are responding to Bythotrephes chemical cues and modifying their daytime vertical distribution patterns and this could have important ecological implications.Although some native copepods appear to be able to perceive and respond behaviorally to Bythotrephes, thereby reducing encounter rates and predation risk, Bythotrephes may still be having significant impacts on copepod populations through non-consumptive effects. This is because while predator-induced behav- ioral shifts reduce predation risk, they come at the cost of reduced growth rate (Loose and Dawidowicz 1994; Pangle et al. 2007) and such non-consumptive effects can contribute strongly to the overall effect of preda- tors on prey populations (Peacor and Werner 2001; Pangle et al. 2007; Preisser and Bolnick 2008). For example, in Daphnia, induced migration reduces prey population growth and adds substantially to the net effect of Bythotrephes on Daphnia populations; on the same order of magnitude as or greater than consump- tive effects of Bythotrephes (Pangle et al. 2007). Thus, Bythotrephes could be having similar negative effects on the population growth of some copepod species by inducing similar vertical responses.Predator-induced behavioral shifts to deeper, colder strata will not only directly alter copepod population growth, but, in so doing, will also indirectly impact their predators and competitors. For example, data suggest that the decline in yellow perch (Perca flavescens) density in an inland lake was due to a bottleneck in survival caused by Bythotrephes’ effect on its zooplankton prey base (Hoffman et al. 2001). This same mechanism could be particularly important in Lake Michigan where yellow perch have an extended pelagic phase in the Great Lakes compared to inland lakes. A comparison of Bythotrephes effects in inland lakes and Lake Michigan would allow for a test of this hypothesis. Reductions in Daphnia and copepod populations due to growth costs imposed by vertical migration could also release non-migrating species like L. sicilis from competition, resulting in an indirect positive effect of Bythotrephes on this species (Peacor and Werner 2000; Relyea 2000). Thus, the behavioral responses of native prey to invasive preda- tors could have myriad cascading effects on other members of the community and could be a major driving force behind the commonly observed strong effects of invasive predators in invaded communities.As native communities continue to be invaded by non-native predators around the globe, changes in the structure and function of these communities are to be expected. Predators can have strong indirect effects on a community, which can be mediated by reduction of prey through direct consumption (Estes and Palmisan 1974; Power 1990) (e.g., consumptive effects, CEs) or through changes in the behavior of prey (Turner et al. 2000; Trussell et al. 2002) (e.g., non-consumptive predator effects, NCEs). NCEs appear to be pervasive in nature and the transmission of NCEs through food webs may be stronger than CEs (Peacor and Werner 2001; Preisser et al. 2005). Thus, understanding how intermediate consumers in a community differ in their transmission of NCEs onto other components of the food web should aid in generating a predictive framework for community dynamics. Because the strength of NCEs will berelated to the magnitude of the intermediate con- sumer’s behavioral response to the predator, under- standing the impact of an invasive predator will require understanding how invasive predators affect the behavior of native prey. As we have shown, invasive predators will not affect the behavior of all native prey the same way. These differences may be influenced by size-related constraints on the prey behavior; susceptibility to encounters with, and attacks by predators; and different evolutionary histories of prey. Such ontogenetic stage- and species-specific attributes could be used to predict the effects of invasive predators on native prey behavior and hence, the magnitude of NCEs of invasive predators on native communities that are mediated by prey behavior.
