xabstract
Centrarchids (sunfish and bass species) and Bullfrogs (Lithobates catesbeianus) have been introduced into aquatic systems around the world and have the potential to negatively impact native fish and anurans. We surveyed fish and anuran assemblages from 26 impoundments in the New Jersey Pinelands, USA. We excluded non-native species and used ordination analysis to generate four native-species community gradients based on native-fish and anuran presence-absence and abundance data. All four community gradients paralleled an increase in thepercentage of upstream-altered land (development and upland agriculture) and an increase in either non native-centrarchid richness or abundance. Based on presence-absence and abundance data, native-fish and native-anuran assemblages, including restricted species (those generally limited to the Pinelands region) andwidespread species (those widely distributed in New Jersey), differed between impoundments with and without non-native centrarchids. Compared to widespread species, the greatest differences between impoundment types were found for restricted species. Three non-native-frog species, including Bullfrogs, were associated with degraded impoundments that supported non-native fish. Our results demonstrate that watershed conditions and native fish and anuran assemblages differ between impoundments with and without non-native centrarchids, and suggest that some restricted species may be especially vulnerable to impacts from watershed disturbance and non-native species. Our findings support the idea that the environmental resistance associatedwith intact water-quality conditions may help prevent the invasion of non-native fish and anurans. We recommend that land-use activities that degrade water quality and reduce invasion resistance be avoided inunaltered watersheds to conserve native-fish and native-anuran community integrity.


xintroduction
Fish have been introduced into nearly every major aquatic system in North America (Crossman, 1991; Fuller et al., 1999; Gido and Brown, 1999). Althoughsome introductions appear benign (Moyle, 1986), others have caused shifts in native-fish behavior and abundance(He and Kitchell, 1990; Marchetti, 1999), or led to the decline or extinction of native-fish species (Miller et al.,1989; Ross, 1991). One group of gamefish native to parts of North America and introduced globally is the Centrarchidae, or sunfish and bass family (Fuller et al., 1999; Elvira and Almodovar, 2001; Jang et al., 2002). Introduced centrarchids have been reported to adversely impact or eliminate smaller, native-fish species from North American lakes (Chapleau etal., 1997; Whittier et al., 1997; Findlay et al., 2000).In the western United States, introduced centrarchidshave also been blamed for the reduction and loss of nativefrog species (Hayes and Jennings, 1986; Kiesecker and Blaustein, 1998). Some centrarchids may even facilitate the invasion of frog species, such as the Bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeianus), because centrarchids may preferentially prey upon macroinvertebrate larvae that normally eat Bullfrogtadpoles (Adams et al., 2003; Maezono and Miyashita, 2003; Maezono et al., 2005). Bullfrogs, which are native to parts of eastern North America (Conant and Collins, 1998), havealso been introduced into many regions of the world (Lanza, 1962; Stumpel, 1992; Wu et al., 2005), including the western United States where they have been implicated in thedecline of several native-frog species (Moyle, 1973; Hayes and Jennings, 1986).Blackwater streams that drain the Atlantic Coastal Plainare typically sluggish and sometimes very acidic (Patrick, 1996). The low pH of these waters may not only provide a refuge for native species adapted to such harsh conditions, but can represent a physiological barrier that prevents the invasion of non-native fish and anurans (Gosner and Black, 1957; Gonzalez and Dunson, 1991). In the New Jersey Pinelands, stream impoundments in forested watersheds arecharacterized by low pH and distinctive native-fish and native-anuran species, whereas impoundments in developed and upland-agricultural basins display elevated pH and support mixed native and non-native fish and anuranassemblages (Zampella et al., 2006). Warm-water centrarch ids and Bullfrogs are the most frequently encountered and abundant non-native fish and anurans in degraded Pine lands impoundments (Zampella et al., 2006). Bullfrogoccurrence is negatively associated with the presence of a native Pinelands congener, the Carpenter Frog (L. virgatipes),which unlike the Bullfrog, is typically found at forested sites (Zampella and Bunnell, 2000). Both species share a similarbreeding period and are common in Pinelands stream impoundments (Zampella et al., 2006). The potential fornon-native centrarchids and Bullfrogs to adversely impact native Pinelands fish and anurans should be greater in degraded impoundments compared to streams because these non-native species are more abundant in impounded habitats (Zampella et al., 2006).We surveyed fish and anuran assemblages from 26 Pinelands impoundments that displayed a range of up stream-land-use conditions. We predicted that impound- ments that supported non-native centrarchids were located in watersheds with greater upstream-land-use intensity and more degraded water-quality conditions than impound- ments without non-native fish. We further predicted that native-fish and native-anuran assemblages differed between impoundment types, and that impoundments with non- native centrarchids also supported non-native anurans. Finally, we tested the assumption that impoundments with non-native centrarchids supported non-native Bullfrogs, whereas impoundments without non-native centrarchids supported native Carpenter Frogs.

xmethods
Study sites.—We surveyed 26 on-stream impoundments located in the Mullica River watershed (Fig. 1). These sites represented most of the impoundments in the basin and were part of a comprehensive assessment of aquatic and wetland resources in the watershed (Zampella et al., 2006). We only excluded impoundments due to lack of access or because they were located immediately upstream or down- stream from an impoundment that was selected. Twenty- one impoundments were located on separate streams and five impoundments were downstream from another im- poundment. Of these five impoundments, four were at least 10 km below the upstream impoundment and the fifth was about 3.5 km below another impoundment. Impoundments ranged in size from 1.1 to 38.2 ha. Two impoundments had been created by beaver dams and 24 impoundments were created by past agricultural and industrial uses (cranberry farming, mills, and forges). We did not know the compo-Copeia 2008, No. 4 sition of fish and anurans in the impoundments prior tosampling.Land use and water quality.—Using AcrView software (Envi- ronmental Systems Research Institute, ESRI, Inc., Redlands, CA, 1988–1992) and United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute digital topographic quadrangles, we delineated the watershed area upstream from each impoundment. Watershed area for the 26 impoundments ranged from 1.4 to 187.5 km2 with a mean of 30.3 (SD 5 48.3) km2. We generated land-use profiles for each impoundment using data from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection 1995/97 Land-use/Land-cover Data Update (2000). Land uses included developed land, upland agricul- ture, wetland agriculture (cranberry and blueberry agricul- ture), forest, wetlands, water, and barren land.Monthly field measurements of pH and specific conduc- tance were completed near the inflow or outflow of impoundments during baseflow conditions in June, July, August, and October of 1999. Specific conductance was measured using an Orion model 122 meter and pH with an Orion model 250A meter. Specific conductance and pH are good measures of watershed disturbance in the Pinelands because both parameters are positively related to the percentage of developed land and upland agriculture in a watershed (Zampella et al., 2007). Specific conductance and pH data were not collected from one impoundment.Biological surveys.—Fish were sampled in each impoundment using a 4-mm mesh nylon seine. All impoundments were sampled for a one-hour period on a single occasion between June and October of 1997–1999. We identified all fish collected and counted the number of individuals of each species. At one impoundment, we stopped collecting abundance data after one-half hour, but continued to sample for species presence–absence for the full hour. With this one exception, fish-abundance values for each species represent the number of fish collected during the one-hour sampling period. Taxonomic nomenclature for fish follows that used in Fuller et al. (1999).We also conducted nighttime anuran-vocalization surveys at the 26 impoundments. All but two sites were visited monthly from March through June (n 5 4) during a single year of a five-year period (1996–2000). One impoundment was surveyed during two months and the other site was surveyed during three months. The number of impound- ments surveyed for anurans during each year (non-native centrarchids present, absent) were 1996 (1,2), 1997 (4,2), 1998 (2,0), 1999 (6,8), and 2000 (0,1). During each visit, we counted the number of vocalizing individuals (up to ten individuals) of each species heard during a five-minute period. No attempt was made to count beyond ten individuals of a given species, so the maximum number for these species is conservative. Anuran-abundance values for each species represent the maximum number of individuals heard calling in a five-minute period.Using a seine, we searched for Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog larvae in each impoundment during the fish surveys. If tadpoles were not collected during the one-hour fish- sampling events, we searched for anuran larvae in shallow portions of the impoundments for an additional ten minutes using a seine and dip nets. The presence of larvae provided a measure of reproductive success for these two species. We targeted Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog larvae because of the previously established negative relationship between adults of each species (Zampella and Bunnell, 2000). Larvae were identified using Altig (1970). Taxonomic nomenclature for anurans follows Frost et al. (2006).Biogeography.—Following Hastings (1984), we classified fish species as restricted, widespread, peripheral, or introduced. Restricted species are generally limited to the Pinelands region of New Jersey, whereas widespread species can be found throughout the state. Peripheral species are normally distributed outside the Pinelands. Introduced species are not native to New Jersey. Following Conant (1979), we classified anuran species as Pine Barrens, wide-ranging, or border- entrant species. Pine Barrens species are restricted to the Pinelands region, wide-ranging species are widely distribut- ed throughout southern New Jersey, and border-entrant species are normally unable to enter the Pinelands except in human-altered habitats. For consistency, we refer to fish and anuran species whose distribution is generally limited to the Pinelands in New Jersey as restricted species, species that are native to both the Pinelands and other areas of New Jersey as widespread species, and species that are native to regions outside the Pinelands as non-native species (Table 1).Data analysis.—We removed non-native-fish and non-na- tive-anuran species from the data set for each site and determined the presence–absence and raw abundance (abundance) of each restricted- and widespread-fish species and the presence–absence and abundance of each restricted- and widespread-anuran species. Anuran abundance was based on vocalization surveys. We used detrended corre- spondence analysis (DCA; Hill, 1979; Hill and Gauch, 1980)to produce four separate ordinations based on native-fish and native-anuran species presence–absence and abundance data. Abundance data were log transformed prior to completing the ordinations. The first-axis site scores and species scores of each DCA summarized the majority of the variation in the species data and represented the primary fish-community or anuran-community gradients (Zampella and Bunnell, 1998; Bunnell and Zampella, 1999; Zampella et al., 2006).To determine if fish presence–absence patterns reflected those generated from abundance data, we used Spearman rank correlation to relate the first-axis site scores and the first-axis species scores between the two fish ordinations. We did the same with both anuran ordinations. To evaluate whether the native-fish and native-anuran community gradients varied with land use or non-native centrarchids, we correlated the first-axis site scores from the four ordinations to the percentage of upstream-altered land (developed land and upland agriculture) and either the percentage of non-native centrarchid species per site (for presence–absence ordinations) or non-native centrarchid abundance at each site (for abundance ordinations). We only included developed land and upland agriculture as altered land because these land uses have been linked to water-quality degradation and fish and anuran invasion in the Pinelands, whereas other land uses, such as wetland- agriculture (cranberry and blueberry farming), have not (Zampella and Bunnell, 1998, 2000; Zampella et al., 2007).We grouped impoundments into those with (n 5 13) and without (n 5 13) non-native centrarchids and used pres- ence–absence and abundance data and multi-response permutation procedures (MRPP) to assess overall differences in native-fish and native-anuran assemblages between impoundments types. Similar to a nonparametric analysis of variance, MRPP is designed to test for group differences in community data (McCune and Grace, 2002). The MRPP analyses were based on Euclidean distance. The DCA and MRPP were completed using PC-ORD for Windows 5.04 (MjM Software, Gleneden Beach, OR, 1999).We used Mann-Whitney U tests to compare restricted-, widespread-, and native-fish and anuran species richness and abundance values; non-native-anuran richness and abundance; and Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog abundance between impoundment types. Anuran richness and abun- dance and Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog abundance values were derived from the vocalization surveys. Fisher Exact tests were used to assess differences in the occurrence of Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog adults (from vocalization surveys) and larvae (from tadpole sampling) between impoundment types. Using the Mann-Whitney U test, we assessed differences in impoundment size and land-use and water-quality conditions by comparing impoundment area, pH, specific conductance, and the percentage of upstream- altered land between impoundment types. To reduce Type I error associated with multiple comparisons, the sequential Bonferroni significance-level adjustment was applied to groups of related Spearman rank correlations, Mann-Whit- ney tests, and Fisher Exact tests (Rice, 1989). Fisher Exact tests, Mann-Whitney U tests, and Spearman rank correla- tions were completed using Statistica 7.1 (Statsoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, 1995).

xresults
Fish inventory.—We collected a total of 3,651 fish from the 26 impoundments, including 3,118 native individuals and 533 non-native individuals. The number of fish collected per impoundment ranged from 20 to 496, with a mean of 140 (SD 5 111) individuals. Twenty fish species were represent- ed, including 12 native species (six restricted species and six widespread species) and eight non-native species (Table 1). Widespread-fish species were collected from all 26 impound- ments (Fig. 2). Restricted-fish species were present at all but two impoundments. These two impoundments supported non-native fishes (Fig. 2).Non-native-fish species were collected from 13 impound- ments (Fig. 2). The three most frequently occurring and abundant non-native species were three centrarchids: the peripheral Pumpkinseed (Lepomis gibbosus) and the intro-duced Bluegill (L. macrochirus) and Largemouth Bass (Microp- terus salmoides). For these non-native centrarchids, the mean abundance where present and frequency of occurrence (%) was 18 (SD 5 25) and 77% for Pumpkinseed, 26 (SD 5 32) and 77% for Bluegill, and 11 (SD 5 9) and 69% for Largemouth Bass. At least one of these three species was present at every impoundment where other non-native fish were found.Fish assemblages.—The DCA axis 1 site scores produced from the ordinations of native-fish species presence–absence and abundance data were significantly correlated (r 5 0.88, P , 0.001). The order of impoundments along the first-axis of the presence–absence ordination was related to the number of non-native-centrarchid species per site (r 5 0.71, P , 0.001) and the percentage of altered land in a watershed (r 5 0.79, P , 0.001). Similarly, the order of impoundments along the first-axis of the abundance ordination was related to the abundance of non-native centrarchids per site (r 5 0.57, P 5 0.002) and the percentage of altered land in a watershed (r 5 0.62, P 5 0.001).The DCA axis 1 species scores from both ordinations were also strongly correlated (r 5 0.97, P , 0.001), and the order of each native-fish species resulting from both ordinations was generally related to the occurrence and abundance of each species at impoundments with and without non-native centrarchids (Fig. 3). Compared to the other seven native species, the restricted Mud Sunfish (Acantharchus pomotis), Banded Sunfish (Enneacanthus obesus), and Pirate Perch (Aphrododerus sayanus) and widespread Redfin Pickerel (Esox americanus) and Eastern Mudminnow (Umbra pygmaea) occurred less often and were less abundant in impound- ments with non-native centrarchids (Fig. 3).We found an overall significant difference in native-fish assemblages between impoundments with and without non-native centrarchids using both presence–absence data (MRPP, P 5 0.005) and abundance data (MRPP, P 5 0.004). Based on Mann-Whitney tests, there was no difference in native (P 5 0.139), restricted (P 5 0.102), or widespread (P 5 0.446) fish-species richness between impoundment types (Table 2). We found a significant difference in native-fish (P 5 0.013) and restricted-fish (P 5 0.001) abundance between impoundment types initially, but only the difference for restricted-fish abundance was significant after Bonferroni adjustment (Table 2). Mean restricted-fish abundance was about one-third lower at impoundments with non-native centrarchids compared to impoundments without non- native fish (Table 2). We found no difference in wide- spread-fish abundance (P 5 0.778) between impoundment types (Table 2). Removing the single impoundment where we did not collect abundance data for the full hour did not affect the abundance results.Anuran inventory.—We heard seven frog and one toad species calling from the 26 impoundments (Table 1). Widespread anurans were heard at all 26 impoundments (Fig. 2). The Carpenter Frog, which was the only restricted species heard, was absent from nine impoundments, all of which supported non-native centrarchids (Fig. 2). Non- native anurans occurred at 14 of the 26 impoundments and 79% of these impoundments supported non-native centrarchids (Fig. 2). The non-native Northern Cricket Frog(Acris c. crepitans) was heard calling from three impound- ments and the Pickerel Frog (Lithobates palustris) was heard calling from two impoundments. All five of these impound- ments supported non-native centrarchids. The Bullfrog, which was the most frequently occurring non-native- anuran, was heard calling at all but one impoundment where other non-native anurans were present.Anuran assemblages.—The DCA axis 1 site scores generated from the ordinations using native-anuran presence–absence and abundance data were significantly correlated (r 5 0.96, P , 0.001). The order of impoundments along the first axis of the presence–absence ordination was related to the number of non-native-centrarchid species per site (r 5 0.60, P 5 0.001) and the percentage of altered land in a watershed (r 5 0.48, P 5 0.012). Likewise, the order of impoundments along the first axis of the anuran-abundance ordination was associated with the abundance of non-native centrarchids per site (r 5 0.61, P 5 0.001) and the percentage of altered land in a watershed (r 5 0.54, P 5 0.004). The order of native- anuran species along the first axis of both ordinations was identical and was generally related to the occurrence and abundance of each anuran species at impoundments with and without non-native centrarchids (Fig. 3).We found an overall significant difference in native- anuran assemblages between impoundment types using both presence–absence data (MRPP, P 5 0.001) and abundance data (MRPP, P , 0.001). Based on Mann- Whitney tests, restricted-anuran-species richness and abun- dance, represented solely by the Carpenter Frog, were both significantly lower (P , 0.001) at impoundments with non- native centrarchids, whereas non-native-anuran-species richness and abundance were significantly higher (P 5 0.001) at impoundments with non-native centrarchids (Table 2). These differences were primarily due to variations in the presence–absence and abundance of the Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog between impoundment types. We found no difference in widespread-anuran richness (P 5 0.782) or abundance (P 5 0.606) between impoundment types (Table 2).Carpenter Frogs and Bullfrogs.—Carpenter Frog and Bullfrog adults were heard calling together at only four impound- ments, including one with non-native centrarchids and three without these species (Fig. 2). Tadpoles of each species were only present at sites where adults of the species were heard calling, and larvae of both species were never found in the same impoundment (Fig. 2). Carpenter Frog adults and larvae occurred significantly less often (Fisher Exact, P , 0.001) and Carpenter Frog adults were significantly less abundant (Mann-Whitney, P , 0.001) at impoundments with non-native centrarchids (Fig. 4). In contrast, Bullfrog adults and larvae occurred significantly more often (Fisher Exact, P 5 0.003 and P , 0.001, respectively) and Bullfrog adults were significantly more abundant (Mann-Whitney, P 5 0.002) at impoundments with non-native centrarchids (Fig. 4).Environmental variables.—Based on Mann-Whitney tests, we found a significant difference in pH (P , 0.001), specific conductance (P 5 0.014), and the percentage of upstream- altered land (P , 0.001) between impoundment types. All three attributes were higher in impoundments that sup- ported non-native centrarchids (Fig. 5). There was no significant difference in impoundment size (P 5 0.369) between impoundment types (Fig. 5).Only impoundments with $ 29% upstream-altered land and pH $ 5.5 supported both non-native fish and non- native anurans (Fig. 2). The two impoundments with non- native centrarchids that did not support non-native anurans displayed the lowest altered-land and pH values for impoundments with non-native fish (Fig. 2). In contrast, the three impoundments without non-native centrarchids that supported non-native anurans displayed the highest altered-land and pH values for the impoundments without non-native fish (Fig. 2).

xdiscussion
Land-use-related watershed disturbance can have a dramatic impact on Pinelands water quality. Compared to relatively unaltered watersheds characterized by low pH and low concentrations of dissolved substances, streams that drainFig. 5. Medians, quartiles, and 10th and 90th percentiles for (A) impoundment size, (B) pH, (C) specific conductance (mS cm21), and (D) the percentage of upstream-altered land (developed land and upland agriculture) for impoundments with (present) and without (absent) non-native centrarchids.developed land and upland agriculture can exhibit elevated pH and specific conductance values and higher concentra- tions of calcium, magnesium, chloride, sulfate, and nitrate (Morgan and Good, 1988; Zampella et al., 2007). Increased pH in degraded Pinelands waters has been attributed to enhanced primary productivity associated with nutrient enrichment (Morgan, 1985). These modified water-quality conditions can lower the environmental resistance to invasion and allow non-native species to become estab- lished in degraded watersheds (Zampella and Bunnell, 1998, 2000). The greater productivity of enriched waters may even provide a feeding niche for non-native fish larvae that is normally reduced or absent in unaltered Pinelands waters (Graham and Hastings, 1984). In our study, impoundments that supported non-native centrarchids were located in degraded watersheds characterized by higher pH and specific conductance values and greater percentages of upstream-altered land. Non-native-frog species, including Bullfrogs, were heard more often and were more abundant at degraded impoundments that supported non-native fishes, and Bullfrog larvae were found only at these sites.A different kind of environmental resistance associated with large, seasonal stream-flow fluctuations from spring snow melt and summer droughts helps to reduce fish and Bullfrog invasion in unaltered California watersheds because these invaders prefer more lentic habitats (Baltz and Moyle, 1993; Moyle and Light, 1996a, 1996b). The ditching and impounding of streams associated with developed- and agricultural-land uses can alter these annual hydrologic extremes, lower environmental resistance, and increase the probability of fish and Bullfrog invasion (Moyle and Light, 1996a, 1996b; Marchetti et al., 2004). As mentioned previously, non-native fish and anurans are also more abundant in Pinelands impoundments compared to stream habitats of the region (Zampella et al., 2006).In contrast to environmental resistance, biotic resistance resulting from competition and predation by native-fish species is thought to be less important in preventing invasion in California waters (Moyle and Light, 1996a; Marchetti et al., 2004). Similarly, it is unlikely that biotic resistance from native Pinelands species could prevent invasion by non-native centrarchids and Bullfrogs because most native fish and anurans are smaller (Page and Burr, 1991; Conant and Collins, 1998) and are therefore more likely to be preyed upon and outcompeted by the much larger non-native species. By far the largest non-native centrarchid we encountered was the Largemouth Bass (Page and Burr, 1991). Impacts to native fishes from Largemouth Bass have been reported to outweigh the effects of other co- occurring introduced fishes, such as the Pumpkinseed and Bluegill (Yonekura et al., 2004; Bonar et al., 2005; Maezono et al., 2005).The similarity between the two fish ordinations and between the two anuran ordinations showed that the native-species community gradients based on presence– absence data reflected those using abundance data. Al- though non-native species were excluded from the ordina- tions, each of the four native-community gradients varied with either non-native centrarchid richness or abundance. Overall differences in native-fish and native-anuran assem- blages between impoundments with and without non- native centrarchids revealed through the MRPP analyses complemented these results.Although the lack of difference in restricted and wide- spread fish-species richness meant that each biogeographic group was equally represented in both impoundment types, the DCA results showed that the occurrence of some individual restricted- and widespread-fish species varied with non-native centrarchids. The much lower restricted- fish abundance for impoundments with non-native cen- trarchids indicated that restricted species may be more adversely impacted by non-native centrarchids compared to widespread species.The lower occurrence and abundance of restricted Car- penter Frog adults and larvae at impoundments with non- native centrarchids and Bullfrogs suggests that Carpenter Frogs may have difficulty surviving with this suite of non- native species. These findings are especially important in a management context because the Carpenter Frog is consid- ered a species of conservation concern in Delaware (http:// www.dnrec.state.de.us/), Maryland (http://www.dnr.state. md.us/), New Jersey (www.state.nj.us/dep/fgw/), and Virgi- nia (http://www.dgif.state.va.us/), USA. The higher occur- rence and abundance of Bullfrog adults and larvae at impoundments with non-native centrarchids indicates that Bullfrogs are capable of co-occurring with non-native fish. In fact, Bullfrogs overlap with many centrarchid species within their native distributions (Page and Burr, 1991; Conant and Collins, 1998) and, as in our study, often co- occur when introduced outside their natural ranges (Hayes and Jennings, 1986; Maezono and Miyashita, 2003).The association of Bullfrogs and non-native fish makes the general absence of Carpenter Frogs from sites that support non-native centrarchids difficult to interpret. Separating the impact of co-occurring introduced fish and Bullfrogs on native anurans is not a new problem (Hayes and Jennings, 1986). On one hand, Bullfrog tadpoles have been found to outcompete larvae of other species (Kiesecker et al., 2001) and Bullfrog tadpoles and adults are known to prey upon the eggs, larvae, and adults of smaller congeners (Erlich, 1979; Bury and Whelan, 1984; Kiesecker and Blaustein, 1997). On the other hand, fish predation can be a powerful force in shaping anuran-community composition (Heyer et al., 1975), and introduced fishes have been identified as oneof the primary causes behind amphibian declines (Hayes and Jennings, 1986). Indeed, the removal of introduced fish can result in the rapid recovery of native-anuran species (Vredenburg, 2004).The potential effects of non-native fish and Bullfrogs on native Pinelands species are further confounded by land- use-related watershed disturbance because water-quality degradation likely precedes the successful invasion of non- native species and may affect the health and survival of both fish and anurans. The relationship between each of the four native-species community gradients and altered land and the difference in land use and water-quality measures between impoundments with and without non-native centrarchids emphasizes this point. Moreover, because we did not measure habitat in the impoundments, we do not know whether vegetation structure or cover differed be- tween impoundment types. The correlative nature of our study prevents us from determining the exact cause of the differences that we observed in native-fish and native- anuran assemblages and the various biogeographic groups.Nevertheless, watershed degradation and the introduction of fish and Bullfrogs into aquatic systems around the world is likely to continue, and has the potential to alter regionally unique aquatic assemblages and contribute to the future biotic homogenization of global freshwater communities (Rahel, 2002). To reduce the potential for fish and anuran invasion, environmental resistance that is inherent in more harsh aquatic systems should be maintained by avoiding land uses that lower invasion resistance. Regional planning can be an effective management strategy for directing land- use activities away from ecologically sensitive environments and channeling them to more appropriate areas (Bunnell et al., 2003). Furthermore, preserving the integrity of an entire watershed holds more promise than site-specific and terrestrial-based habitat conservation for protecting native- aquatic communities and preventing fish and anuran invasions (Moyle and Randall, 1998; Marchetti et al., 2004).Watersheds that support intact native fish and anuran assemblages are becoming rare. In the Pinelands, non-native fish and anurans were present at 50% of the 253 fish-survey sites and 55% of the 194 anuran-survey sites sampled during watershed assessments throughout the region (Pinelands Commission, unpubl. data). Intact native fish and anuran assemblages are reported to be even more uncommon in California (Moyle and Randall, 1998). Because it is probably easier to prevent the invasion of fish and anurans rather than attempt to remove them once they are established, natural-resource and fisheries managers should work to- gether to avoid introductions in stream systems that support intact native assemblages (Li and Moyle, 1981). A critical first step in protecting native-aquatic communities is determining where indigenous fish and anuran assemblages still exist.
