xabstract
Introduction of salmonids is a common and widespread practice in rivers and lakes of Patagonia, but their impacts remain poorly understood. We analyse the effect of exotic introduced salmonids (rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss) on the benthic macroinvertebrate community of low order streams. We conducted a field survey in three headwater streams (Challhuaco, Cascada and Pescadero streams) in the northern Andean-Patago- nian region (around 41 ̊ S and 1500m above sea level). The streams are canopied by deciduous Nothofagus pumi- lio forest. On each system, we established fishless and contiguous fish sites separated by waterfalls that limit fish access to upper sections. At each site we determined benthic macroinvertebrate size, taxonomic and functional structure in addition to trout gut contents. In the presence of trout, we observed significant shifts in invertebrate body size towards smaller individuals, thus a decrease in total macroinvertebrate biomass was observed. We found that large taxa (Klapopteryx kuscheli, Tipula sp.) and active swimming species (Metamonius anceps and Hyalella curvispina) were reduced in abundance or were absent in reaches with trout. At the same time, we found that trout positively selected large size classes of invertebrates. As a consequence of species losses, benthic com- munity structure changed drastically in the presence of trout: shredders were the feeding group most affected neg- atively (–68%) followed by scrapers. The reduction of shredders may suggest a potential effect on Nothofagus leaf litter breakdown and hence, supply of FPOM to downstream reaches.

xintroduction
Top fish predators can alter fundamental ecological properties such as the dominance of a certain species and the ecosystem’s physical features, primary pro- ductivity and nutrient recycling (Vitousek 1990). In freshwater systems, fish have important effects at individual, population, community and ecosystem levels (Power 1992, Nyström et al. 2001, Townsend 2003). Evidence of direct impacts causing the elimi-nation of native species is common (Flecker & Town- send 1994, McIntosh 2000, Mack et al. 2000). In addition, fish can affect several trophic levels via cas- cade effects (Power 1992, Brönmark et al. 1997, Hu- ryn 1998). In particular, fish have played an impor- tant role in the differential elimination of species of diverse sizes and food niches (Townsend 1996). Usually, visual predators exert a strong size-selective force (Gilliam et al. 1989, McIntosh 2000), and may determine the size structure of the community through selective removal of certain sizes (Peckarsky 1982, Bechara et al. 1992, 1993). Salmonids were widely introduced in different parts of the world, and available information suggests that their impacts may be severe and rapid (Townsend 2003). Salmonids are visual size-selective predators, which feed mainly on drifting invertebrates (Newman & Waters 1984). Pre- vious studies showed that following salmonid intro- duction reductions of large or active swimmer species can occur (e. g Townsend & Hildrew 1984). As a con- sequence changes in size structure of the invertebrate community towards smaller sizes have been reported (Wilzbach et al. 1986, Bechara et al. 1993, Usio & Townsend 2000). These changes would have impor- tant implications for ecosystem functioning because they might influence food-chain efficiency and energy transfer in aquatic food webs.Patagonia has a complex landscape with many lakes, rivers and small streams. In this region, the introduction of salmonids has been a common prac- tice that began early in the twentieth century to en- hance wild fish populations with valuable sport fishes (Pascual et al. 2002). Nowadays, the Patagonian fish fauna is dominated by exotic salmonids (mainly rain- bow trout), however, their impact on native fish and other aquatic biota remains poorly understood (Mo- denutti & Balseiro 1994, Pascual et al. 2002).Headwaters in Patagonia are located in the Andes at 1100 m a. s. l. where streams are canopied by deci- duous endemic beeches of the genus Nothofagus, which are responsible for most of the leaf litter input (Modenutti et al. 1998, Albariño & Balseiro 2002). The input timing and breakdown rates of Nothofagus pumilio (P. et E.) Krasser leaf litter might be key dri- vers in the functioning of small canopied streams (Albariño & Balseiro 2002). Shredders, mainly large nymphs of Plecoptera, contribute substantially to leaf litter breakdown (Albariño 2001, Albariño & Balseiro 1998, 2002). The Plecoptera are a fairly old group of lotic freshwater insects with an extremely high de- gree of endemism in this region (Illies 1977). The se- lective feeding behaviour of trout raises the possibil- ity that this visual predator could affect large shred- ders or active-swimmer invertebrates such as Plecop- tera and Ephemeroptera. We hypothesise that the im- pact of salmonid fish on preferred dietary com- ponents belonging to particular functional feeding groups, such as large shredders or swimmer grazers, would drive the community to a novel structure and functioning. To test this hypothesis we analysed the effects of an alien fish predator on invertebrate size, taxonomic and functional structure in Andean Patago- nian headwater streams.

xmethods
Study siteThis study was carried out in three low order streams of the Nahuel Huapi basin: Challhuaco, Cascada and Pescadero streams. The area is located in the Nahuel Huapi National Park, Northwestern Patagonia (Argentina) and corresponds to the deciduous forest district of the Subantarctic province. Challhuaco and Cascada streams flow through a deciduous N. pumilio forest (“lenga”) while the canopy of Pescadero stream is mixed, composed of both N. pumilio and the evergreen N. dombeyi (Mirb.) Blume (“coihue”). The climate is cold tem- perate, with a mean annual temperature of 8  ̊C and rainfall around 1700 mm/year mainly falling in autumn.The streams contain a series of waterfalls that act as phys- ical barriers for salmonid movements allowing us to identify fishless and fish sites in neighbouring reaches (above and be- low of natural barriers, respectively). In Challhuaco stream, we established a fishless site called UBCh (Up-Barrier Chall- huaco) and an immediately continuous trout reach called DBCh (Down-Barrier Challhuaco). Cascada stream joins Challhuaco downstream after a high waterfall allowing us to replicate the fishless site (Up-Barrier Cascada; UBCa). Down- Barrier Challhuaco was considered a common site for both fishless upper barrier sections. Pescadero stream has two close waterfalls that determine three contiguous reaches with differ- ent trout abundances as determined in a preliminary survey. The uppermost section has no fish (Up-Barrier Pescadero; UBPe), and the middle (Inter-Barrier Pescadero, IBPe) and lower (Down-Barrier Pescadero; DBPe) reaches have low and high abundance trout, respectively. DBCh and DBPe resulted in similar fish abundance (see results).The different study sites are very similar in physical and chemical features. Sampling sites were located in sections with ~ 1.6 m width and ~ 0.36 m depth (t-test comparing fish- less and fish sites P > 0.05). The substrate was a mixture of boulders and cobbles averaging 0.22 m in diameter (t-test comparing fishless and fish sites P > 0.05). Streams have di- luted waters dominated by calcium, bicarbonate and dissolved silica (Pedrozo et al. 1993). Water pH was circumneutral, and dissolved oxygen concentration was always at saturation. Wa- ter temperature varied during the year, from 11 ̊C in summer to 2 ̊C in winter. Conductivity was low, varying between 40– 45 μS cm–1 (autumn–winter) and 45–64 μS cm–1 (spring– summer) (t-test comparing fishless and fish sites P > 0.05). Water velocity ranged from 27cm s–1 (summer) to 114cm s–1 (winter) (t-test comparing fishless and fish sites P > 0.05). All study sites are canopied by Nothofagus forest that prevents di- rect sunshine reaching the stream surface. In spring–summer, noon sunny days irradiance varies between 8–25μmol pho- tons m–2 s–1.Macroinvertebrate and fish samplingFrom May 2003 to June 2004 stream benthic invertebrates were collected with a Surber sampler (0.09 m2, 250 μm mesh size). Ten randomly collected replicates were taken at each site in winter 2004 (UBCh, UBCa, UBPe, IBPe, DBCh and
DBPe). In addition, we carried out seasonal sampling in spring, summer, and autumn 2003 – 2004 in UBCh, UBCa and DBCh (10 replicate Surber samples at each date).Samples were preserved in 5 % formalin until processing. In the laboratory all invertebrates were sorted, identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level, and counted. Additionally, invertebrates were assigned to functional feeding groups (FFGs) (Merritt & Cummins 1996, Albariño & Balseiro 2002, Velázquez & Miserendino 2003). Measurements of total body length of each individual, excluding antennae and terminal cerci, were made with an ocular micrometer (at the nearest 0.1mm). Biomass was estimated from length-weight regres- sions (Miserendino 2001). When not available, regressions were obtained from our own data. Specimens were measured, dried at 80  ̊C for 24 h, weighed to the nearest 0.01 mg and used to estimate length-weight relationships.On each sampling occasion (carried out between 11 and 15 hs) fish abundance was obtained by electrofishing. A stream section of 50 –75 m2 was enclosed with ballasted nets (5 mm mesh size) to prevent fish escapes. Then, the entire section was scanned three times with a backpack electroshocker, and all fish collected. The absence of fish in the upper barrier sec- tions of Challhuaco, Cascada and Pescadero streams was con- firmed by extensive electrofishing (covering over 300 m2) and visual inspection.All fishes caught were identified and, fork length, max- imum mouth width and mouth height, were measured. In order to evaluate trout diet, 20 randomly selected fish from each sec- tion were killed immediately after capture to avoid post-cap- ture digestion of prey items, and individuals were preserved in 5 % formalin. All fishes not used in stomach content analysis were released immediately after measurement. In the labora- tory, gut analysis was performed under a stereomicroscope identifying and measuring each prey item. Prey identification was achieved by comparing digestion-resistant body parts (head capsules, mouthparts, tergal plates, etc.) with reference material. Measurements of resistant parts were used to esti- mate total prey body size.Data analysisNumerical and gravimetrical analyses of stomach content were performed. The numerical importance (%N) of each food prey category was calculated estimating the numeric percentage of individuals in all 20 stomachs on each sampling date. The rel- ative importance of a food item in the diet was expressed as a percentage of dry weight relative to total dry weight of all foods found in the gut (%D). The Ivlev electivity index (Ivlev 1961) was calculated to estimate trout selectivity for each single size class (independently of taxonomic identification).Ii = ri – pi ri + piwhere ri and pi are the proportions of ith size class in the gut content and in the environment, respectively. This index varies from –1 (complete rejection) to +1 (complete selection), with values around zero indicating that feeding is proportional to item abundance in the environment.Differences in fish size and macroinvertebrate abundance and biomass were tested with ANOVA, and when necessary a Tukey ́s test was performed for a posteriori multiple compari- sons. Invertebrate size class frequency distributions between fish and no fish sites were compared using Chi-square good- ness of fit test (χ2). The size frequency distributions of fishless and fish sites were used as the expected and observed distribu- tion, respectively. Statistical differences in the biomass of the different Functional Feeding Groups (FFGs) between fish and fishless sites for winter or other seasons were assessed by t-test. Data were log-transformed to achieved normality and/or homoscedasticity when necessary. Macroinvertebrate commu- nity differences in fishless, low and high fish abundance sites were analysed by a detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) using the CANOCO software (Ter Braak & Smilauer 1998). Species with abundances < 1 % of total macroinvertebrate abundance were not considered in this analysis. Additionally, significant differences among communities from different sites were tested based on the difference between the average of all dissimilarities between samples between groups and the aver- age of all dissimilarities between samples within groups (Quinn & Keough 2002). For this purpose we used the soft- ware ANOSIM of the package Primer (Plymouth Marine labo- ratory, Plymouth, USA).

xresults
Electrofishing revealed the complete absence of fish in the upper sections of streams (UBCh, UBCa and UBPe). On the other hand, the lower sections, DBCh and DBPe, have very similar fish abundance (Table 1). These two sites were considered, in this study, as the high abundance sections. The intermediate section at Pescadero stream (IBPe) presented very low fish abundance, around one fifth of that found in the lower sections (Table 1). In all fish sites, rainbow trout (On- corhynchus mykiss, Walbaum) comprised 98 % of all fish collected while brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis, Mitchill) made up the remaining 2 % and no native fishes were recorded. The few specimens of brook trout were only recorded at the DBPe section in Pes- cadero stream. Fish morphometry (fork size and mouth width and height) attained values very similar among reaches; however, fishes at the low abundance IBPe section were slightly larger although no signifi- cant differences were observed (ANOVA F5,114 = 1.42, P = 0.220) (Table 1).We recorded a total of 34 taxa of benthic macroin- vertebrates, although only 15 taxa accounted for 79– 89% and 82–95% of total abundance and biomass, respectively. In winter, total invertebrate biomass dif- fered between fish and fishless sections (ANOVA, F2,45 = 20.372, P < 0.001) (Fig. 1A). High abundance fish reaches presented significantly lower total biomass than fishless sites (Tukey test, P < 0.001), and the patterns of cumulative community biomass distri- bution differed mainly by changes in the biomass of the four largest invertebrates (Fig.1A). The IBPe sec- tion showed intermediate values. Overall, total bio- mass was reduced near 50 % (IBPe) and 75 % (DBCh and DBPe) of that found in fishless sites (Fig. 1A). The persistence of the large scraper Notoperla archi- platae (Illies) in IBPe made the difference between this section and DBPe (Fig. 1A). Similar patterns were found in summer, spring and autumn, in Challhuaco-Cascada streams between fishless and high abundance fish sections (Fig. 1B, C and D). Smaller taxa (body length ≤ 3 mm) increased in abundance at fish sites and compensated for the losses of large, more vulnerable taxa. In consequence, total inverte- brate abundance was similar in fish and fishless sites in winter (ANOVA F2,45 = 2.317, P = 0.11), spring (ANOVA F1,22 = 1,182, P = 0,289) and autumn (ANOVA F1,19 = 0.0602, P = 0,809) (abundance ~3000 ind. m–2). However, in summer invertebrate abundance in fish sites was higher than in fishless ones (ANOVA, F1,22 = 13,586, P = 0.001), due to an increase of the small-bodied taxa (abundance ~ 4000 ind. m–2 in fishless to ~7000 ind. m–2 in fish sites).The abundance of the different macroinvertebrate species was strongly affected by fish presence. The multivariate DCA analysis showed that samples were grouped according to the presence of fish along a gra- dient of fish abundance regardless of the stream (Cas- cada, Challhuaco and Pescadero) (Fig. 2). The two first axes explained 32.5 % of total variance. The sta- tistical analysis showed that benthic communities grouped in the DCA differed significantly (ANOSIM, global rho = 0.424, P = 0.001), and the post hoc pair- wise comparison also showed differences between each pair of groups (rho fishless vs low fish. = 0.360, P = 0.001; rho fishless vs. high fish = 0.402, P = 0.001; rho low fish vs. high fish = 0.611, P = 0.001).Considering the whole dataset, we observed that there are species consistently affected by the presence of fish. On the one hand, trout negatively affected nine taxa of which six (Cura sp., Klapopteryx ku- scheli Illies, Hyalella curvispina Shoemaker, Met- amonius anceps (Lestage), scirtids and Smicridea sp.) showed strong reductions (Fig. 3A). Cura sp. and Smicridea sp. were only negatively affected in high abundance trout sites (Fig. 3A). The others were re- duced in both high and low abundance fish sites (Fig. 3A). Hyalella curvispina, the scirtid and M. an- ceps were practically excluded in the presence of fish. On the other hand, five taxa (Chironomidae, Oligo- chaeta, Aubertoperla illiesi (Froehlich), Antarctoperla michaelseni (Klapalek), and Pelurgoperla per- sonata Illies) presented important differences at trout sites compared to the fishless ones (Fig. 3B). All taxa, except Oligochaeta, tended to increase their abun- dance in high abundance fish sites (Fig. 3B). Chirono- mids seemed to benefit most in the presence of trout since their numbers were up to four times higher than at sites without trout. Moreover, all but A. illiesi had higher numbers at high fish abundance sites than at low abundance sites (Fig. 3B).As a consequence of these changes, the size fre- quency distribution of the invertebrate community in fish sections was displaced towards smaller size clas- ses compared to fishless sites. We found significant differences when we compared pooled winter data of fishless-low abundance (χ2(18) = 39.75; P < 0.001), fishless-high abundance (χ2(18) = 318.35; P < 0.001) and low-high abundance (χ2(18) = 203.56; P < 0.001). Only the upper barrier sections (fishless sites) pre-sented individuals larger than 35 mm (Fig. 4). The smallest size categories (from 1 to 3 mm) increased from 58% in fishless sites to 68% and 74% in the low and high abundance trout reaches, respectively (Fig. 4). In the other seasons, only studied in the Challhuaco-Cascada systems, we found a similar pat- tern where small size classes increased from 37– 56 % at fishless sites to 47–72 % at the fish site (χ2(18) = 1003.43; P < 0.001 in summer; χ2(18) = 667.48; P < 0.001 in autumn and χ2(18) = 1027.16; P < 0.001 in spring). As macroinvertebrate size changed season- ally, we observed peaks of high frequencies displaced towards smaller size classes from spring to autumn in Challhuaco-Cascada streams probably associated with adult emergence and offspring increase during late spring to early autumn.Rainbow trout diet was dominated by aquatic macroinvertebrates (Table 2). In guts, prey size clas- ses larger than 3 mm represented 74 % of total prey. Those prey smaller than 3 mm were less important in guts compared to the composition of stream benthos (Fig. 4). Our analysis indicated that large inverte- brates (mean body size > 8.5 mm) represented be- tween 50–60% of fish gut content. In high abun- dance trout sites, four taxa (mean size < 4 mm) com- prised nearly 50 % of the gut content (Table 2). In contrast, in the low abundance trout section three taxa of intermediate size (mean body size 4–7mm) domi- nated fish diets surpassing 50 % of gut content and re- markably, the mayfly M. anceps accounted for 22 % of the diet.The Ivlev’s index (E) obtained for each prey size class confirmed trout selectivity for specimens larger than 5 mm on any sampling date and fish site (Fig. 5). Maximal positive selection occurred on the interme- diate and large size classes. Prey size selection varied seasonally from smaller prey items in autumn-winter (prey selected > 3 mm) to larger ones in spring-sum- mer (prey > 5 mm) (Fig. 5).Macroinvertebrate community composition chan- ged substantially since trout predation did signifi- cantly affect the biomass of the different FFGs (see t- test results in Fig. 6). Fishless sections were domi-Fig. 4. Winter Pooled data of size class frequency distribution (mean ± SE) of benthic macroinvertebrates in fishless, low abundance trout and high abundance trout stream sections. Prey in trout gut content indicated with solid line.nated by shredders followed by grazers and collector feeders. In contrast, sections with fish showed in all cases a significant decrease of shredders (–68%) (Fig. 6). These reductions were also observed for scrapers (–31%) and filtering-collectors (–20%). Predators and gathering-collectors did not show sub- stantial changes in biomass (–7% and +1%, respec- tively). As a result of these shifts in biomass, the functional trophic structure of the community changed in the presence of fish towards a community dominated by small shredders and collectors.

xdiscussion
In our study, aquatic macroinvertebrate size distribu- tion differed between stream sections with and with- out fish. In the fish sections we observed a domi- nance of smaller individuals ( ≤ 3 mm) and the scar- city or absence of large specimens that were found in the above barrier fishless sites. As a consequence, taxonomic composition, total biomass and functional structure differed greatly among sections.Predation has long been viewed as an important force in structuring ecological communities, influenc- ing the abundance and species composition of prey assemblages (Crowder & Cooper 1982). Fish, as vis- ual predators, can exert strong control on the prey community by drastically reducing total community biomass. Flecker & Townsend (1994) reported reduc- tions of up to 50 % in macroinvertebrate biomass in stream channels stocked with brown trout (Salmo trutta L.). In other streams with both alien and native fish, a shift towards an invertebrate community domi- nated by smaller size-classes has resulted in biomass decline (Gilliam et al. 1989, Wilzbach et al. 1986, Bechara et al. 1993). Our study in Andean forested headwaters suggested that rainbow trout affect the biomass of invertebrates through the selective elimi- nation of large macroinvertebrates. At the same time, as predation acts directly on prey populations, indi- rect facilitation can take place through release from competitors and intermediate predators (Shurin 2001). The reduction of large invertebrates caused by fish predation has been suggested as an indirect rea- son for small invertebrate numerical increase (Power 1992, Bechara et al. 1992, Usio & Townsend 2000). In our field study, species that benefited from trout presence (e. g. chironomids) compensated for the loss of species that were depressed by predation (e. g. Ti- pula sp., K. kuscheli); thus, trout caused shifts in spe-cies composition and size frequency distribution but had no great effect on total invertebrate abundance.Body size mediates the outcome of predator-prey interactions; insect small sizes may result as an effec- tive refuge against fish predation (Bechara et al. 1993, Huryn 1998). Our findings on the impact of trout on the macroinvertebrate community were also sup- ported by the analysis of gut contents. These showed selectivity towards macroinvertebrates larger than 3 mm.Although body size was observed to be a reason in prey vulnerability to trout predation, other traits can also be important. Two abundant taxa in fishless sites, the mayfly grazer Metamonius anceps and the gammarid shredder Hyalella curvispina, were scarce or absent in fish reaches, suggesting that individuals were consumed as soon as they colonized trout sites from above barrier fishless sites through drift. Both species are active swimmers and this feature in addi- tion to their size (mean size: 6.8 mm) would increase their vulnerability to size-selective drift-feeders such as trout. Population reduction of large active swim- ming species such as the mayfly Nesameletus ornatus (Eaton) and amphipods as a consequence of trout predation were also reported in New Zealand and USA streams (Newman & Waters 1984, McIntosh & Townsend 1994). On the other hand, the presence of spatial refuges such as interstitial habitats may also account for differences in prey vulnerability (Culp 1986, Bechara et al. 1992). For instance, in our stream sections with fish, the abundance of large oli- gochaetes (8.1mm) increased. Although large inverte- brates displayed contrasting vulnerabilities to fish predation, total community biomass was reduced in relation to fish abundance: total biomass was reduced near 50% in IBPe to 75% in DBPe of that found in fishless site (UBPe). The same reduction (75 % from fishless sites) was observed in the Challhuaco system under very similar trout abundances.Although Andean headwaters are detritus-based systems in which shredders play an important role in processing coarse organic matter coming from the Nothofagus forest (Albariño & Balseiro 2002), they also support an important benthic algal community that serve as food resource for grazers (Albariño & Díaz Villanueva 2006). As expected and supporting our hypothesis, the biomass of large shredders and grazers was reduced in the presence of trout. Cascad- ing effects of fish predators in streams have been al- ready shown in both detritus-shredder (Ruetz et al. 2002, Greig & McIntosh 2006) and periphyton-grazer (Power 1992, Brönmark et al. 1997, Townsend 2003) three-trophic systems. Therefore, the significant re- duction found in shredder and grazer biomasses as a consequence of fish predation is likely to alter eco- system processes (i. e. reduction in detritus break- down rates and increase in primary production) in those small Andean streams.Our study provides evidence that trout in Patago- nian streams may influence size frequency distribu- tion, total biomass, and taxonomic and functional composition of benthic macroinvertebrates. In our study we have documented biodiversity loss in response to fish presence, but natural barriers mitigated such effects. On the other hand, upstream fishless reaches (i. e. small streams) have been recently seen as important sources of food supply to downstream fish population (Wipfli & Gregovich 2002). Al- though our study agrees with this statement, it also highlights the importance of fishless upper stream sections as refuges for populations of vulnerable species.
