xabstract

Non-native species can alter ecosystem functions performed by native species often by displacing influential native species.
However, little is known about how ecosystem functions may be modified by trait-mediated indirect effects of non-native
species. Oysters and other reef-associated filter feeders enhance water quality by controlling nutrients and contaminants in
many estuarine environments. However, this ecosystem service may be mitigated by predation, competition, or other
species interactions, especially when such interactions involve non-native species that share little evolutionary history. We
assessed trophic and other interference effects on the critical ecosystem service of water filtration in mesocosm
experiments. In single-species trials, typical field densities of oysters (Crassostrea virginica) reduced water-column
chlorophyll a more strongly than clams (Mercenaria mercenaria). The non-native filter-feeding reef crab Petrolisthes armatus
did not draw down chlorophyll a. In multi-species treatments, oysters and clams combined additively to influence
chlorophyll a drawdown. Petrolisthes did not affect net filtration when added to the bivalve-only treatments. Addition of the
predatory mud crab Panopeus herbstii did not influence oyster feeding rates, but it did stop chlorophyll a drawdown by
clams. However, when Petrolisthes was also added in with the clams, the clams filtered at their previously unadulterated
rates, possibly because Petrolisthes drew the focus of predators or habituated the clams to crab stimuli. In sum, oysters were
the most influential filter feeder, and neither predators nor competitors interfered with their net effect on water-column
chlorophyll. In contrast, clams filtered less, but were more sensitive to predators as well as a facilitative buffering effect of
Petrolisthes, illustrating that non-native species can indirectly affect an ecosystem service by aiding the performance of a
native species

xintroduction

Although non-native species often negatively affect ecosystem
services in their introduced ranges (e.g., [1]), they can also
positively influence ecosystem services by complementing the roles
of native service providers or mitigating their loss [2–6]. For
example, Pattemore and Wilcove [5] show that an invasive rat and
bird in New Zealand are able to partially replace pollination
services where native pollinators have declined. Similarly, Mattingly
et al. [6] show that an invasive plant in the southeastern
USA has boosted local nitrogen fixation and is actually enhancing
native tree growth. In many examples like these, the effect of the
invader is to directly supply an ecosystem service that replaces or
enhances the service of native species. However, regardless of
whether the effects of the invader on ecosystem services are
positive or negative, most studies focus exclusively on how the
alteration of effects is produced through density-mediated changes
that occur as a result of the invasion. It seems logical, but seldom
specifically explored, that non-native species could also indirectly
affect ecosystem services through alteration of species traits, for
example by altering the performance of important native service
providers. For many communities of native species, such traitmediated
indirect interactions have been found to be of equal or
greater magnitude to direct, density-mediated effects [7,8].
Understanding how effects on ecosystem services operate is
increasingly important since non-native species now account for a
sizable portion of biota in many habitats, including coastal
environments [9–11]. Furthermore, with rising human influence
on habitat and water quality of estuaries, there is a growing need
to quantify the ecosystem services provided by coastal habitats (e.g.
[12–14]). However, data on key ecosystem services are surprisingly
rare, even for common habitats such as oyster reefs. In particular,
we lack a basic understanding of how the magnitude and nature of
ecosystem services may change spatially and temporally as a
function of species interactions, especially those involving nonnative
species.
In this paper we consider the direct and indirect impacts of a
non-native species on water filtration. Water filtration is a critical
ecosystem service provided by oysters and oyster reef-dwelling
species that is likely affected by many biological and environmental
factors. Oyster reef construction using the native oyster
Crassostrea virginica Gmelin 1791 is a major restorative technique
used in many coastal areas along the eastern seaboard of the
United States, especially in the southeast [15]. Reef construction is
justified in part by its purported effect on enhancing water quality
[16,17], and by earlier lab studies that suggest that C. virginica is
highly efficient at drawing down material out of the water column
(e.g., [18,19]). Several studies have extrapolated individual oyster
feeding rates to approximate the time needed for the oysters to
process the overlying water column [20–23]. However, these
calculations vary substantially in their conclusions over whether
oysters have a controlling influence on water quality. Few in situ or
experimental data exist on how well oysters contribute to water
clearance in realistic settings [24–28].
We advocate that examination of the most common filter
feeding reef species in concert adds critical, community-level
insight to our understanding of this ecosystem function. For
example, it would be informative to know how oysters’ filtration
rates compare against other filter feeders in the environment, as
well as how intervening variables in the environment, especially
biological interactions, might modify projected rates. Interactions
with non-native species may be particularly influential since such
species lack a shared evolutionary history with the species in the
native community [29,30]. Along with the oysters themselves,
oyster reefs in the southeastern US harbor a filter-feeding native
clam and non-native crab species, both of which may influence
overall reef filtration rates. In combination, these filter-feeding
species could have inhibitory effects on net filtration if they interact
negatively, or additive (or even synergistic) effects if they feed on
complementary planktonic resources or otherwise influence other
species’ filtering behavior.
Filtration by species when alone and in combination may also
be affected by the presence of predators. Predators, like the
mudcrab Panopeus herbstii H. Milne Edwards 1834, are abundant
on oyster reefs, and can reduce prey density through consumption,
which reduces the prey’s net effect on the ecosystem service of
water filtration. Conversely, predators may have positive effects on
filtration if they preferentially prey upon the inferior filter feeders
and reduce competition and interference effects for those
individuals that remain. Predators may also influence the prey’s
net effect through non-consumptive effects that alter the behavior
or physiology of the prey in a way that reduces the prey’s per
capita feeding rates [31,32]. Non-consumptive predatory influences
have been increasingly shown to be important in estuarine
environments in a number of these species [33–35].
We compared filtration rates of two dominant native bivalve
filter feeders (Crassostrea virginica and Mercenaria mercenaria Linnaeus
1758) in Georgia to the invasive crab, Petrolisthes armatus Gibbes
1850 (hereafter Petrolisthes), a relatively new non-native species on
the Georgia coast. This small, filter-feeding crab reaches enormous
densities on reefs, sometimes more than a thousand per square
meter [36], but can experience large swings in population size due
to low temperature sensitivity [37]. This crab may compete or
interfere with the bivalves’ feeding rates, for example, if olfactory
cues or tactile disturbance from the crabs cause periodic filtration
cessation in the bivalves. But such interactions are hard to predict
given the paucity of natural history information on the crab as well
as its lack of evolutionary history with the other native filter
feeders.
Here we use single and multiple species combinations to
experimentally quantify possible competitive or synergistic effects
on filtration rates among the oysters, clams, and Petrolisthes. We
further examine how these filter feeders’ performance and
interactions with each other are affected by predator presence.
Thus, with our approach we can address whether Petrolisthes
compromises or enhances filtration rates and whether its effects
operate directly or indirectly through interactions with the species’
shared predator.

xmethods

Overview
To compare filtration abilities we quantified chlorophyll a
drawdown by three abundant oyster reef species: the oyster
Crassostrea virginica, the hard clam Mercenaria mercenaria, and the
invasive crab Petrolisthes armatus. Using a laboratory seawater
system at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, we examined
short-term (3-hour) filtration rates of the species in aquaria. Each
species was measured alone, in all pairwise combinations, and all
together to test whether filtration is altered by interspecific
interactions. Finally, to assess whether base filtration characteristics
are altered by the presence of a predator, we performed a
second experiment in which we added a common predator of all
three filter feeders (the mud crab, Panopeus herbstii) to each
treatment.
Study animals
We collected oysters and crabs at low tide from intertidal oyster
reefs at Priest Landing, located in the Wilmington River estuary in
southeast Georgia (31u 57945.340 N, 81u09 48.080 W). To facilitate
obtaining enough clams of a standardized size class, we purchased
15–20 mm M. mercenaria from Bay Shellfish Company, Palmetto,
FL in June 2010, and grew them in the intertidal mudflat at Priest
Landing until the start of laboratory experiments in November
2012, at which point M. mercenaria had a mean shell length of
52.6 mm. (The hatchery-born clams are from Atlantic coast brood
stock that had ample wild clams continually mixed in to ensure
genetic diversity). Following field collection, we cleaned the oysters
and clams of epibionts, separated individual oysters from oyster
clumps, and weighed and measured all individuals (Table 1). We
used large adults of the two bivalve species that are mostly
invulnerable to crab predation because we wanted to focus on
non-consumptive predator effects on filtration rates. Because the
study organisms used are all invertebrates, no specialized animal
care protocol was required. Organisms were collected under a
scientific collection permit from the Georgia Department of
Natural Resources on public land accessed through boat landings
at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography.
We kept the animals in separate containers in a flow-through
seawater system to acclimate them to laboratory conditions for at
least 24 hours prior to each experiment. Seawater was pumped
directly from the Wilmington River, and then passed through a
series of gravel filters and a sand filter prior to entering the lab
flow-through system. We collected 10 liters of water from the
system and passed it through a 10 mm sieve to determine the
zooplankton concentration, which we counted under a dissecting
microscope and observed to be extremely low (1 copepod/10 L).
During the experiments, laboratory water temperatures ranged
between 14.6 and 16.3uC, which was comparable to natural field
temperatures for this time of year [38].
Experimental set-up
We wanted to measure collective chlorophyll a drawdown by
multiple individuals. To standardize comparisons across species,
we used equalized total wet mass of oysters and clams (54 oysters,
18 clams) in our treatments (Table 1). We chose a value for total
mass that roughly equated to densities of oysters measured in field
surveys (Byers, unpublished data). We used an equivalent clam
mass to keep the treatments matched, and thus readily comparable
against one another. This resulted in clam densities somewhat
higher than typical field densities in this area [39]; however, high
clam densities should make our results conservative since the
results reflect very low comparative influence of clam filtration.
For completeness we also performed a separate, complementary
experiment to compare filtration between clams and oysters that
standardized the treatments by dry tissue mass (54 oysters, 30
clams), but this approach made little difference to the results. Dry
mass for clams was calculated by creating a size-dry mass
regression from a sample of 10 clams from our experimental
population. For oysters we used a standard published size-dry
weight regression from Ross and Luckenbach [40] (dry
weight =0.00003 x shell height2.4; R2= 0.80). We chose Petrolisthes
densities to approximate the low end of the density range
previously observed in surveys within the Wilmington River
estuary (500/m2) [36] (Table 2).
Chlorophyll a drawdown by filter feeders
We used an additive design that allowed us to observe
differences in chlorophyll a drawdown between individual species,
species in all pairwise combinations, and all three species together
for a total of 8 treatments, including a no-species control (Table 2).
We set each treatment in a separate, individually aerated, 18-L
plastic tank (42.9 cm629.2 cm624.5 cm) with flow-through
seawater and no sediment on the bottom. We did not use
sediment because we did not want to risk sediment becoming
suspended and interfering with fluorometry measurements or
behavioral observations. We ran one replicate of each treatment in
a randomized block and we ran four replicate blocks on successive
days. In each block, we measured chlorophyll a drawdown over a
3-hour time period. We measured chlorophyll a in vivo fluorescence
with a WET Labs FLNTUSB fluorometer, which was standardized
against extracted chlorophyll a measured on a Turner 10AU
fluorometer from water samples taken at the beginning, middle,
and end of one trial, as well as from known serial dilutions of algal
feed [41]. We attached the fluorometer to a PVC stand that held
the fluorometer underwater at a constant, downward angle in the
treatment containers.
At the beginning of each trial, we turned off the water flow into
the first aerated tank to create a closed system. We chose zero net
flow because it is tractable. It is also realistic, as there are periods of
slack tide for upwards of an hour (out of a 6-hour high tide) at our
collection sites. However, an active aeration stone was present in
each tank to maintain some water movement. We added 5 ml of
commercial algae commonly used in aquaculture operations
(Instant Algae Shellfish Diet 1800, Reed Mariculture, Campbell,
CA, USA). The algal cells in the Shellfish Diet are non-viable, but
intact, and are a mix of four marine microalgae: Isochrysis (40%),
Pavlova (15%), Tetraselmis (25%), Thalassiosira weissflogii (20%). The
amount of algal diet addition was intended to approximate the
highest chlorophyll a levels observed in the Skidaway River
estuary, which reach up to 70 mg/L [38,42]. Our average initial
algal concentration was 45.7 mg/L (66.3 SD). Starting with high
chlorophyll a levels allowed us to enhance the contrast of
drawdown by our treatments. The tank then sat undisturbed for
two minutes, after which we immersed the fluorometer. Two
chlorophyll a measurements were taken within two minutes;
simultaneously, we turned off water flow in the second treatment,
added 5 ml of algal feed, and allowed the second treatment to sit.
After two minutes, we moved the fluorometer to the second
treatment to take two chlorophyll a measurements in the
subsequent two minutes. This process was repeated for the
following six treatments, until algal additions were added to all
treatments. We then moved the fluorometer sequentially among
treatments every two minutes over the course of three hours,
taking two chlorophyll a measurements with each progression.
Trials were intentionally kept short to minimize accumulation of
olfactory cues in our closed system. Although lab measurements on
olfactory responses of these species have been shown to be
consistent with data from field situations where flow and
turbulence levels are moderate [35], we acknowledge that
olfactory responses could be accentuated compared to field
measurements.
Predator addition experiment
Immediately following the above trials, we performed a second
set of trials to assess the effects of predator presence on chlorophyll
a drawdown of filter feeders. We conducted four replicate trials as
described above, but with each algal addition at the beginning of
the trial, one P. herbstii was also added to the treatment (including
the control). Additionally, in order to have contemporaneous
controls of non-predator effects on drawdown, two extra oyster
and oyster-clam treatments without P. herbstii predators were
included in these trials. These treatments did not differ significantly
from their matching treatments in the non-predator trials,
so the extra replicates of these two treatments were used in the
non-predator analyses. We also added two extra replicates of the
oyster and oyster-clam treatments with predators to this set of trials
to balance the number of replicates of these two treatments
between the predator and non-predator trials. We generally noted
biotic responses including the feeding-related activities of the filter
feeders (bivalve time spent gaping, crab particle feeding and
activity), dead prey, and predator activity levels.
Our response variable was chlorophyll a drawdown, which we
standardized in our treatments relative to the chlorophyll loss in
the control treatment for each trial. The loss of chlorophyll a over
three hours in controls was high (,40%), but consistently similar
in every trial (standard deviation = 2.95). Losses in the controls
were likely due primarily to settling. We explored light-triggered
chlorophyll a degradation as a possible loss mechanism by running
controls in a darkened refrigerator (4 C) and compared this loss to
a control under ambient conditions. The rate of loss in
fluorescence was nearly identical. Loss mechanisms such as
bacterial or viral attack were considered but discounted because
of the short time scales involved; moreover, the loss in fluorescence
was not slowed appreciably at 4 C, which would have slowed
degradation. Fluorescence data gathered in controls were
subtracted from the total signal in the treatments concurrently
run within a block.
Data analysis
Often a logit transformation is needed for non-binomial
proportion data [43]. However, in this case the data were more
normal without transformation and residuals showed no evidence
of nonlinearity or heteroscedasticity so we did not transform the
response variable.
Several a priori statistical comparisons were planned. First we
used ANOVA to compare chlorophyll a drawdown among the
three single species treatments, followed by a post hoc Tukey test
to differentiate specific treatment differences. Second, we used the
same approach to compare among the oyster, clam, and combined
oyster-clam treatments to test for additivity or inhibitory effects
when both bivalves were combined. Third, we performed three
pairwise t-tests (assuming unequal variances), testing each bivalve
treatment with and without Petrolisthes, to test for possible
interference from this crab species. Finally, to discern which
filter-feeding species and combinations of species performed
differently in the presence of predators, we performed all of these
same analyses on the trials done in the presence of P. herbstii
(Table 3). We also compared each treatment with predators to its
analogue treatment without predators with t-tests. Statistical
analyses were performed in JMP v.10.

xresults
Chlorophyll a drawdown by filter feeders
Chlorophyll a drawdown differed among the individual species
(Tables 2 and 3), with oysters extracting significantly greater
quantities of chlorophyll a compared to the clam and Petrolisthes
treatments (Figure 1). The relationship between the oyster and the
clam treatments was consistent in an additional trial set that
compared species with population sizes determined by equivalent
dry tissue weights, rather than total wet weights [Mean standardized
percent chlorophyll a loss (6 SD) over three hours: oysters
41.261.6; clams 4.163.3].
Chlorophyll a decreased in the control treatment, likely due to
algal particle settlement. Treatments were standardized to the
control to account for this ambient loss (Figure 1). Loss of
chlorophyll a in the Petrolisthes treatment was slightly, but
significantly less than the control, perhaps as a result of particle
re-suspension by energetic crab movement (1-way t-test, t =22.4,
df =3, P =0.048). We observed Petrolisthes actively moving their
mouth parts throughout the experiments; however, their filtering
activity did not negatively affect chlorophyll a concentrations.
Multi-species treatments that allowed for observation of
interspecific interactions showed that chlorophyll a drawdown of
oysters and clams together was generally additive (Figure 1,
Table 3). However, the presence of Petrolisthes did not significantly
affect chlorophyll a drawdown of either oysters or clams, or the
combined drawdown of the two bivalve species (Figure 1, Table 3).
There was no evidence of the positive influence of Petrolisthes on
chlorophyll a that was observed when it was alone.
Predator addition experiment
Comparing analogous treatments between the no
predator and predator addition trials. Chlorophyll a drawdown
by filter feeders decreased somewhat in the presence of P.
herbstii (Figure 2). However, a reduction in chlorophyll a drawdown
in the presence of crab predators was only significant in the clam
treatment (Figure 2). Predators had some effect on chlorophyll a
drawdown by Petrolisthes (p= 0.06); however, its drawdown actually
increased to match the level of the control treatment, perhaps
because predator presence limited Petrolisthes activity and resuspension
of algal particles. We observed that Petrolisthes ceased
filtering activity in the presence of predators and, in some cases,
were preyed upon, as evidenced by mangled bodies with missing
parts. Chlorophyll a drawdown by the combined oyster and clam
treatment decreased in the presence of predators, but not
significantly. All three bivalve species treatments (oysters, clams,
oysters and clams) containing Petrolisthes responded similarly with
predators compared to their responses without predators (Figure 2).
Comparing single and multiple species trials within the
predator addition trials. Clams drew down significantly less
chlorophyll a than both the oyster and the oyster-clam treatments,
which both responded the same (Table 3). The presence of
Petrolisthes in the oyster treatment when a predator was added
made no significant difference to chlorophyll a drawdown, but
Petrolisthes presence did significantly boost chlorophyll a drawdown
by clams 3.45 mg/L, or 20%, when a predator was present
(Tables 2 and 3, Figure 2). The addition of Petrolisthes to the
combined oyster and clam treatment also boosted drawdown by a
similar amount in absolute terms (3.94 mg/L) (Table 2); however,
this boost in relative terms was 12% and not quite statistically
significant (Table 3, Figure 2).

xdiscussion
The net effects of non-native species that severely reduce or
displace native species on ecosystem services are often negative
[44–46]. However, it is also important to understand the
consequences of the addition of the large number of invasive
species that do not displace native species [3]. In particular, when
species displacements do not occur, it is important to examine the
role of non-lethal, indirect effects of non-native species on
ecosystem services.
In our study, the direct effect of the non-native Petrolisthes is
extremely low because the crab likely does not eat phytoplankton,
as we observed no chlorophyll a drawdown for this species. Caine
[47] reports that Petrolisthes mostly consumes zooplankton and
detritus; any algae that is ingested is apparently benthic in origin.
Thus, the slightly positive effect of the crab on water column
chlorophyll a concentrations may be explained by observations
that Petrolisthes affects localized water currents, which could hinder
phytoplankton from settling. In contrast, groups of oysters drew
down substantial amounts of chlorophyll a, and clams a moderate,
but significant amount, corroborating previous findings that C.
virginica per capita feeding rates are typically higher than Mercenaria
clams [18,48]. Although clam effects on chlorophyll a were
smaller, when combined with oysters, the two species had an
additive effect. Such additivity, as opposed to competitive or
inhibitory effects, was likely facilitated by the high resource levels
available in this experiment.
In the simplest combinations of species there were no signs of an
indirect trait-mediated effect of Petrolisthes. That is, in the absence
of predators, Petrolisthes had no effect on clam and oyster net
filtration, underscoring that this invasive crab is likely not in
competition for resources with the filter-feeding bivalves. Even
without resource competition, we had hypothesized that tactile
disturbance from the crabs might cause periodic feeding cessation
in the bivalves, but we did not observe any decreases in
chlorophyll a drawdown rates by the bivalves when Petrolisthes
was present.
However, the native mud crab predator did differentially
influence filtration rates of the species. Oysters maintained the
same filtration rate as when predators were absent. However,
clams were very sensitive to predators and ceased filtration
altogether. In the presence of predators, chlorophyll a drawdown
in the oyster-clam treatment was equivalent to the oyster-only
treatment, which is consistent with the notion that clam filtration
was inhibited by predator presence. The indifference to mud crabs
by oysters may be explained by large oyster sizes. Mud crabs
generally prey on juvenile oysters, and the large adults we used in
this study are largely an invulnerable size (e.g., [49,50]). The
clams’ sizes in our study make them equally invulnerable to P.
herbstii predation (e.g., [51,52]), but they responded more
sensitively to predators. This heightened sensitivity existed despite
the fact that we seldom observed P. herbstii handling the large
clams. In the presence of predators Petrolisthes arrested its physical
activity and chlorophyll a decreased to exactly match the nospecies
controls. That is, in limiting Petrolisthes activity, predator
presence eliminated the small positive effect that Petrolisthes had on
chlorophyll a levels (relative to the controls). Perhaps when
Petrolisthes cease their filtering activity and movements they are no
longer altering water currents and re-suspending phytoplankton.
Despite Petrolisthes’ limited direct effect on filtration, the addition
of Petrolisthes to treatments in the predator trials had an interesting
indirect effect. In the combined clam and Petrolisthes treatment,
Petrolisthes presence buffered predator effects on clams, and
chlorophyll a drawdown by the clams was no longer negligible,
but rather back at positive levels equivalent to those that had been
measured when predators were absent. There was also a trend of
this facilitative buffering effect by Petrolisthes in the three-species
treatment, but we did not observe this effect in the oyster and
Petrolisthes combined treatment. Taken together, these results
suggest that the clams were able to filter at their previously
unadulterated rates even in the presence of a predator when
Petrolisthes was also present. The mechanism involved here is
uncertain, but abundant Petrolisthes may habituate and desensitize
clams to tactile or olfactory crab stimuli, such that clams continue
filtering in the presence of mud crab predators. Mud crabs also
appear to target Petrolisthes more strongly than the adult clams,
which is supported by our observation of multiple, dismembered
dead Petrolisthes at the end of the predator trails, and by the known
high prey value of Petrolisthes to P. herbstii [53]. There is no
discernible buffering effect of Petrolisthes on the adult oysters, which
were already indifferent to predatory crab presence.
In our controlled lab setting with a fixed numbers of predators
and prey, the invasive Petrolisthes seemingly allows a more fully
functioning ecosystem service of higher net water filtration by
clams and thus the collective oyster reef community. However, it is
uncertain if this positive influence will hold in natural field settings
with dynamic populations. In particular, it should be cautioned
that if Petrolisthes as a new food resource boosts P. herbstii
populations, this could create attendant negative effects of
apparent competition on the populations of native prey species
[54,55], which in the long run could diminish the prey’s collective
filtration services. Longer term studies that account for shifts in
population equilibria due to Petrolisthes’ introduction, as well as
field trials that incorporate natural reef conditions, are clearly
needed to complement the performance assessment we have
conducted here on the relative impact of non-native species on the
critical ecosystem service of water filtration.
In summary, this study shows the largest portion of oyster reef
filtration is attributable to oysters, which have a naturally high
filtration rate that is not compromised by native mud crab
predators or the invasive Petrolisthes. Clam filtration is notably
diminished by mud crab presence; however, chlorophyll a
drawdown by clams may be restored in the presence of the
common non-native crab Petrolisthes. Petrolisthes likely does not
compete with bivalve filter feeders for similar foods and may
facilitate clam filtration by desensitizing the clams to predator cues
or reducing the predator’s tactile perturbations that stem from its
foraging and sediment probing. More generally, our study
demonstrates that non-native species can have differential, nonlethal
effects on native species that can alter ecosystem services.
Although such trait-mediated indirect effects are more subtle to
capture than direct effects on density, their important influence
seen here, coupled with the increasing spread of non-native species
across all types of ecosystems, suggests the compelling need to
understand how commonly these kind of effects occur.