xabstract
Interactions between adult individuals of the introduced Eastern mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki and two native fish species to the Iberian Peninsula, the Iberian toothcarp Aphanius iberus and the Valencia toothcarp Valencia hispanica, were studied in mesocosm and laboratory experiments. East- ern mosquitofish always excluded both Valencia and Iberian toothcarp when the ratio introduced-to-native was at unity or favourable to the non-native species. Food availability did not decrease significantly in the mesocosm experimental units. However, specimens of native species had a greater number of empty guts than those of Eastern mosquitofish at the end of the mesocosm experiment. Ethograms were constructed based on qualitative observations in aquaria, with a special emphasis on social behaviours, in particular agonistic (which ultimately were not observed between the species). Satiety (maximum prey number) and voracity (number of prey consumed per unit of time) of the three species were measured in aquaria. The Eastern mosquitofish achieved the highest foraging values (maximum prey 1⁄4 11, at 11–12 prey min)1), whereas Valen- cia toothcarp achieved the lowest values (maximum prey 1⁄4 7, at 5–6 prey min)1). The observed interactions between Eastern mosquitofish and the two native species are discussed.

xintroduction
In the early 20th century, the Eastern mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki (Agassiz, 1859) was introduced to the Iberian Peninsula from North America to help control malaria, being that mosquito larvae and pupae can be an important compo- nent of the species diet (de Buen, 1929; Najera, 1944; Vargas, 1993; Almac ̧a, 1995, 1996). At present, the genus Gambusia exists in almost all river basins of the temperate zone worldwide (Nelson, 1994). Eastern mosquitofish is an excellent example of a non-native species that adapts easily to novel environments and that it is likely to have a direct effect on the survival of native species, in particular fish. One of the most frequently quoted cases (e.g. Garcia-Marin et al., 1990; Elvira, 1995; Vargas and de Sostoa, 1997; Rincon et al., 2002) is the possible interaction between Eastern mosquitofish and two Cyprinodontiform species, the Iberian toothcarp Aphanius iberus (Valenciennes, 1856) and the Valencia toothcarp, Valencia hispanica (Valenciennes, 1856). Competition for food resources is a possible mechanism of this interaction because all three species share common trophic resources (Vargas, 1993; Vargas and de Sostoa, 1999; Caiola et al., 2001a; Caiola and de Sostoa, 2002). Furthermore, when they coexist in the same place, Eastern mosquitofish usually outnumbers the two native species, and this is probably the result of differences inlife history strategy (Vargas and de Sostoa, 1996, 1997; Caiola et al., 2001b).Competition for food can be defined as any interaction between individuals that causes a reduction in foraging success to one or the other (Gill and Hart, 1996). The term Ôscramble competitionÕ has been used to describe individuals that simultaneously encounter a single prey item and compete in a non-aggressive manner for the resource (Milinski and Parker, 1991). In this case, the prey is a discrete package of energy, which means that only the individuals with higher satiety and voracity levels, thus with better competitive abilities, can successfully obtain prey at the expense of the other competitors. In theoretical terms, predators in compe- tition for a single resource item can have either equal or unequal competitive abilities (Parker and Sutherland, 1986; Milinski and Parker, 1991). When unequal competition exists, the resource gained by a given individual will depend on its ability to compete.The aim of the present study was to determine whether competitive interactions occur between non-native Eastern mosquitofish and the native Iberian and Valencia toothcarps. Our main objectives were to test, in a mesocosm experiment, the effect of adult non-native fish relative density on the survival of native species and to determine how food resources are affected. Species ethograms were constructed and inter- specific agonistic behaviours were analysed. Satiety and voracity levels were analysed for the three species as indicators of competitive abilities and as an attempt to explain mesocosm results and to test the hypothesis of non-aggressive competi- tion for food resources.

xmethods
The study was carried out at the Biological Station of Ebro Delta Natural Park (Catalonia, Spain) from 1 June to 30 September 1999 (mesocosm experiments) and from 1 March to 30 April 2000 (aquaria experiments and observations). Specimens of Iberian and Valencia toothcarps were obtained from a captive breeding station in the Ebro Delta Natural Park, where both species are maintained in monocultures for re-introduction and restocking programmes. During the year of the experiment, macrophyte coverage in these ponds was non-existent in the winter and dense in the summer, when the dominant species was Ceratophyllum demersum L. The pond banks were covered by Juncus maritimus Lam. and Phrag- mites australis (Cav.). Water was supplied from a channel network, which collects water from the river Ebro about 50 km upstream and is used for flooding rice fields. Spec- imens of Eastern mosquitofish were captured in nearby ponds of similar character to those in which the toothcarp were reared.The mesocosm experiments were conducted in an outdoor, artificial channel (60 m long · 5 m wide) with continuous water supply from the same channel network mentioned above. Water temperature, salinity, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, pH, nitrites, nitrates, ammonium and phosphates were monitored once per week during the experiment and found to be constant and suitable for fish survival. The experimental units were 100 · 50 · 50 cm cages of 1 mm mesh size nylon net uncovered on the upper side and three-channel sediment trays (40 · 30 · 10 cm rectangular plates) as food source.The aquarium experiments were run in an indoor laboratory at room temperature and under conditions of natural light. For observing behaviour, four 250 L aquaria, of size equiv- alent to the mesocosm experimental units (100 · 50 · 50 cm), were filled with water and allowed to mature for 60 days prior to the observations. Water passed through a closed filter system (mechanical and biological filtration) and was oxygen- ated by means of an air compressor. Each aquarium was provided with a 5 cm layer of sand, natural vegetation (C. demersum) and stone fish shelters. In front of each aquarium, a blind was settled to prevent disturbance of the subjects. For satiety and voracity experiments, nine 96 L aquaria (80 · 40 · 30 cm) were prepared as described (beha- vioural observations), except for the presence of vegetation and shelters. Furthermore, each aquarium was divided into three equal compartments using nylon netting of 2 mm mesh size.Design of mesocosm experimentsA randomized design was used to test the effect of the three fish proportions (introduced-to-native species ratios: 1 : 1, 1 : 5 and 5 : 1) on the survival of the individuals of each species because of interactions and on prey availability in the mesocosms. Three other introduced-to-native species ratios were also tested and used as control conditions (C) for both assessments (1 : 0 and 0 : 1 for fish survival; 0 : 0 for prey availability). Each block of experiments was replicated five times, resulting in a total of 30 experimental trials per native species. A total of 60 adult fish of approximately the same size (40–50 mm, except for Eastern mosquitofish males that are smaller) were used in the desired proportions (introduced-to- native). A similar sex ratio (females : males) as in the wild was maintained for each species during the experiments: 4 : 1 for the Eastern mosquitofish (Vargas and de Sostoa, 1997); 1 : 1 for the Iberian toothcarp (Vargas and de Sostoa, 1997); 1 : 1 for the Valencia toothcarp (Caiola et al., 2001b). Before starting the experiment, cages were completely submerged in the experimental channel for 2 weeks in order to allow colonization of the invertebrate community. Thereafter, cages were not completely submerged, leaving 10 cm of the cage above water level. During the experiment, the upper part of each cage was covered by a 1-mm mesh size plastic net to avoid both bird predation and the arrival of terrestrial food sources.Fish were initially acclimated to the channel conditions for a 2-week period and then released in each one of the appropriate experimental units. At the start of the experiment, prey availability was determined from three samples taken from the sediment and the water column collected in each cage, using a PVC cylindrical core sampler (50 cm high, 5 cm diameter). As water level and sediment depth were constant in all the experimental units, water and sediment samples alwaysshowed a constant volume. Water was separated from the sediment and filtered through a 1-mm nylon sieve. Each sediment sample was filtered through a 1-mm steel sieve. Invertebrates retained in both sieves were collected and preserved in 4% formalin for subsequent analysis. The most abundant invertebrates (Gammarids and larvae of Chirono- mids), which are common prey items in the diet of the three species (Vargas, 1993; Vargas and de Sostoa, 1999; Caiola et al., 2001a; Caiola and de Sostoa, 2002), were quantified as indicators of food availability. After 90 days, at the end of the experiment, the same procedure was repeated and fish remaining alive in the experimental units were counted, killed, dissected, and the entire gut was preserved in 70% ethanol. Using a stereomicroscope, prey were counted and identified in order to determine the number of prey categories per gut. Prey in the gut were, generally, only partially digested, which made identification relatively easy.Aquarium experiments and data analysisBehavioural observations were carried out for each species separately to build species ethograms: 60 specimens of a species per ÔmaturedÕ aquarium with the same sex ratio used in the mesocosm experiment. Social, especially agonistic, behaviours were noted for each species, which were subsequently placed together in aquaria in species pairs as well as with all species combined in one aquarium (four aquaria in total), maintaining the same density of individuals per aquarium in a 1 : 1 proportion of species. Six principal agonistic behaviours were considered for the three species separately: (i) ÔapproachÕ – one fish swims towards another fish; (ii) ÔchargeÕ – one fish swims rapidly towards another fish; (iii) ÔbuttingÕ – forceful impact by one fish against another with its snout (usually follows a charge); (iv) ÔpushingÕ – same as butting but with a softer impact; (v) ÔbiteÕ – one fish attempts or succeeds at biting the operculum, body or fin of another fish; (vi) ÔpursuitÕ – rapid chase of a fish by another (i.e. a prolonged version of ÔchargeÕ). A total of 50 h of observations were made for each species ethogram. As no new behaviours were observed after 30 h of observation, 30 h of effort was applied to quantify interspecific agonistic behaviours. All specimens were transferred from the aquaculture and nearby ponds (for native and non-native specimens respectively), always using new individuals in the experimental setting, and allowed to acclimatize for 2 days before recording visual observations, which were undertaken over a period of several days.Three aquaria were used per species for the satiety and voracity experiments: two test aquaria (one for satiety, one for voracity) and one acclimatization tank into which fish were transferred from the aquaculture ponds and where they were held 1 week before the trials. Once a day, food was provided to each tank (frozen chironomid larvae of the same size were used as prey). Fish were transferred from the holding aquarium to the test aquaria and they were used in the experiments for 15 days. After this period, they were replaced by new specimens to avoid the subjects to get used to artificial conditions. For each trial, one female specimen of 45 ± 2 mm total length was placed in each of the equal compartments. The satiety and voracity trials were both carried out once a day at 08:00 hours during the first week and at 18:00 hours during the second week, separated by a day of rest during which no food was given. This process was repeated thrice for each species.Satiety was measured as the total number of prey consumed by an individual: prey items were dropped one by one in each aquarium compartment and satiety was considered to be reached when the fish did not take that prey item (or spat it out immediately following capture). Voracity was determined by measuring the time that the fish took, to consume five prey items that were dropped simultaneously into the compartment.Owing to non-normality of the data, even after various transformations, non-parametric tests (i.e. Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA and Mann–Whitney U-test) were used as appropriate to test for statistical differences between experimental treat- ments, both in the mesocosm and aquarium experiments, with statistical significance set at a 1⁄4 0.05 (Sokal and Rohlf, 1995).

xresults
In the mesocosm experiments, the percentage of survival of the Eastern mosquitofish did not vary significantly between experimental blocks in both the Iberian and Valencia tooth- carp trials (Kruskal–Wallis, P > 0.5). The percentage of survival of the two native species varied between blocks (H 1⁄4 12.52, P 1⁄4 0.002, in both cases). In the between-block comparisons, the percentage survival in Iberian toothcarpvaried significantly in every combination (U 1⁄4 0.00, P 1⁄4 0.009), except for the comparison between the control and the 1 : 5 proportion (U 1⁄4 8.00, P 1⁄4 0.347). Whereas, in Valencia toothcarp, the percentage survival differed signifi- cantly in every combination (U 1⁄4 0.00, P 1⁄4 0.009), including the comparison between the control and the 1 : 5 proportion (U 1⁄4 2.00, P 1⁄4 0.028). Survival of both native species was reduced in the presence of the Eastern mosquitofish, with survival decreasing as the proportion of the non-native species increased (Fig. 1). Iberian toothcarp suffered from this effect only when the proportion of Eastern mosquitofish was equal or greater than the native species; whereas, Valencia toothcarp was more sensitive, demonstrating reduced survival even when the proportion of the Eastern mosquitofish was relatively low (Fig. 1).The indicator invertebrates of food availability (gammarids, chironomid larvae) colonized all experimental units equally (H 1⁄4 59.00, P > 0.4). The abundance of these two inverte- brates in each experimental block did not decrease significantly during the experiment (Table 1). However, there was a highly negative correlation between survival and the proportion of empty guts in both native species: Iberian toothcarp (Spearman’s q 1⁄4 )0.84, P < 0.001); Valencia toothcarp (Spearman’s q 1⁄4 )0.90, P < 0.001). Thus, the percentage of empty guts in native species was higher in experimental blocks with lower survival rates, with identically significant levels when comparing species within the same experiment (Fig. 2).In the aquarium experiments, agnostic behaviours were not observed, and satiety and voracity levels did not differ within the same species between individuals, days and moments of the day (Kruskal–Wallis H, P > 0.05). These parameters were highest in the Eastern mosquitofish and lowest in the Valencia toothcarp (Figs 3 and 4), which generally consumed no more than five prey items before reaching satiety. Satiety and voracity both varied significantly between species, both overall (Kruskal–Wallis, P < 0.001) and in pair-wise comparisons (Mann–Whitney U, P < 0.001). Indeed, Valencia toothcarp demonstrated constantly low voracity rates, with more than 50% of the individuals consuming between three and four prey per minute (Fig. 4).

xdiscussion
Adults of non-native Eastern mosquitofish have demonstrated negative impacts on the survival of the two native toothcarp species (Fig. 1). The underlying mechanism is exclusion interference, which is manifest by a decrease or absence of feeding activity (Fig. 2). This level (or intensity) of native toothcarp exclusion varies as a function of the relative density of Eastern mosquitofish, with higher introduced-to-native ratios resulting in greater levels of exclusion. Indeed, Eastern mosquitofish was never excluded by either of the native species, not even when the ratio of native species was disproportionately higher than that of the non-native species. Our mesocosm results appear to corroborate the field surveys in nature, where Eastern mosquitofish generally outnumbers native toothcarp species. The high densities of Eastern mosquitofish probably result from its life history strategy, which is characterized by viviparity and high fecundity (Vargas and de Sostoa, 1996), and from its high voracity levels.Empty guts were virtually non-existent in Eastern mosqui- tofish, but were commonly observed for the native species. Moreover, there was a direct relationship in both native species between a decrease in survival and an increase in the proportion of empty guts. Interspecific agonistic behaviours, in particular predation by adult Eastern mosquitofish on juvenile Iberian and Valencia toothcarp, has been described as the main mechanism responsible for the decline of the two native species (Rincon et al., 2002). However, no evidence of fish predation or agonistic behaviours was observed in our experiments, where food was permanently available at con- stant levels. This suggests that non-aggressive competition for food is the principal interactive mechanism between adults of these species. Indeed, most studies have reported no predation by Eastern mosquitofish on other fishes (Pen and Potter, 1991; Pen et al., 1993; Vargas, 1993; Arthington and Marshall, 1999; Garcia-Berthou, 1999; Vargas and de Sostoa, 1999; Geddes and Trexler, 2003). And in the two studies where predation on other fishes was observed, it was very infrequent (Ivantsoff and Aarn, 1999; Stoffels and Humphries, 2003).The Eastern mosquitofish presented the highest levels of satiety and voracity, which evinces a greater foraging ability than in the two native toothcarp species. In periods of reduced prey abundance, this could provide Eastern mosquitofish with a competitive advantage. Indeed, our behavioural observations suggest that the mere presence of Eastern mosquitofish reduces the amount of space available to native species. So, even under conditions of adequate food resources, habitat exclusion combines with a slow feeding rate, and presumably increased energetic costs of foraging (Milinski, 1986; Milinski and Parker, 1991; Gill and Hart, 1996) to disfavour the native toothcarp species relative to the introduced mosquitofish. And when food resources are limiting, efficient foragers may be better suited to cope than can less efficient foragers (Coates, 1980; Rubenstein, 1981), as the energetic costs of foraging are reduced in efficient foragers, as they acquire more prey per energetic expenditure than inefficient foragers.In conclusion, it is likely that competition for food with introduced Eastern mosquitofish is one of the principal causes for the decline of the Iberian and Valencia toothcarp. When resources are scarce, the non-native invader has a clear advantage, being able to forage faster and more efficiently than the two native species of toothcarp. And although habitat loss has coincided with the introduction of the Eastern mosquitofish (de Buen, 1929; de Sostoa, 1990; Elvira, 1995), the decline in distribution and population sizes of both toothcarp species can be attributed mainly to mosquitofish introduction. Indeed, after the introduction of Eastern mos- quitofish, population declines have been observed in both toothcarp species even in otherwise unmodified ecosystems, such as some places of the Ebro Delta (Sostoa, 1983; Bianco, 1987; Garcia-Berthou and Moreno-Amich, 1991; Perdices et al., 1996). Valencia toothcarp appears to be particularly sensitive to the presence of Eastern mosquitofish. The results of the present study suggest that Valencia toothcarp, which is currently categorized as ÔendangeredÕ on Spanish and IUCN red list conservation lists (Doadrio, 2001), should be reclassi- fied to the highest protection level.

