xabstract
In aquatic systems low dissolved oxygen (DO) has been identified as a serious water quality problem. Here we use empirical data and modeling to explore the hypothesis that the introduction of an alien aquatic macrophyte (Trapa natans) may have had dramatic impacts on the frequency and extent of low DO events in the Hudson River. Continuous measurements with moored instruments demonstrated that in large macrophyte beds dom- inated by a native species (Vallisneria americana) DO never declined below 5 mg/L during the summer growing season. In contrast, during this same time period, extremely low DO was common in large beds dominated by Trapa natans, with DO values below 2.5 mg/L occurring up to 40% of the time. This difference in DO can be modeled based on species differences in the balance of respiration and in-water photosynthesis. The low DO values in Trapa beds suggest that these beds may be poor habitats for sensitive fish and inver- tebrates and that redox sensitive chemical reactions may be altered within Trapa beds.

xintroduction
The vegetated areas in aquatic systems can be im- portant to ecosystem function in lakes, rivers, and es- tuaries (Wetzel 1983, Kemp et al. 1984). Macrophyte beds generally have high primary production (Sonder- gaard and Sand-Jensen 1979, Wetzel 1983) and can, thus, be important sources of organic matter, supporting higher trophic levels and influencing the net metabo- lism of aquatic systems (France 1995, Duarte and Ce- brian 1996). Further, beds can trap sediment, be sites of intense nutrient cycling, and provide important hab- itat for fish and invertebrates (Carpenter 1980, Graneli and Solander 1988, Garritt 1990, Kiviat 1993, Wel- comme 1995, Wilcock et al. 1999).An important characteristic of macrophyte beds that can alter nutrient cycling and the quality of beds as habitats for fish and invertebrates is dissolved oxygen (DO). When DO falls below 5 mg/L (156  mol/L), sensitive species of fish and invertebrates can be neg- atively impacted. At DO levels below 2.5 mg/L most fish are negatively impacted (Frodge et al. 1990). DO can also impact biogeochemical reactions. Prolonged low DO events may lower nitrification and denitrifi- cation (Kemp et al. 1990), while short time scale al- ternation between oxic and hypoxic conditions can en- hance denitrification (Knowles 1982). Further, low DO may increase metal and P release from sediments (Lov- ley 1993). Low levels of DO can occur regularly in bottom waters of aquatic systems (Wetzel 1983, Ra- balais et al. 1996) or throughout the water column insystems with heavy organic loads (Clark et al. 1995). They can also be associated with macrophyte beds (Suthers and Gee 1986, Moore et al. 1994, Miranda and Hodges 2000, Miranda et al. 2000).Low DO events have been reported for thick beds of submerged aquatic vegetation at dawn or during fall senescence (Kaenel et al. 2000, Miranda and Hodges 2000). Emergent and floating-leaved vegetation may, however, be more likely to be associated with persistent or frequent low DO (Frodge et al. 1990). Some floating- leaved macrophytes vent much of their photosyntheti- cally produced oxygen directly into the atmosphere rath- er than into the water column (Pokorny and Rejmankova 1984). Further, the densely packed canopy of floating leaves severely lowers light beneath it, shading out pho- tosynthesis by any submergent leaves or attached algae (Cataneo et al. 1998). Lastly, the dense canopies of float- ing-leaved macrophytes can prohibit gas exchange and make more severe low DO generated by negative net ecosystem production in the water column.The proportion of emergent- to floating-leaved mac- rophytes in a system can change over time, and this change can be human induced. Humans can alter the hydrologic or nutrient regime, and these changes can be more favorable to one growth form than another (Valiela et al. 1992, Kiviat 1993). Humans can also directly impact the abundance of macrophyte growth forms via species introductions (Kiviat 1993). In the Hudson the introduction of the Eurasian Water Chest- nut (Trapa natans), which has both floating and sub- mersed leaves, appears to have occurred at the expense of native macrophytes, which were completely sub- mersed (Kiviat 1993).The tidal portion of the Hudson River has approxi- mately a 1-m tidal range over its 240-km length, which extends from Albany to New York City (Limburg et al. 1986; Fig. 1). The northern 140-km stretch is fresh water. For this stretch, 70% of the freshwater flow orig- inates from inputs from the Mohawk and upper (non- tidal) Hudson River (Lampman et al. 1999). Trapa was introduced to the Hudson’s watershed as early as 1879; a 1934 survey showed Trapa to be abundant in the Mohawk River but did not detect Trapa in the tidal Hudson itself (Muenscher 1935, 1937). At this time species found to be abundant in the subtidal regions of the tidal Hudson had submersed leaves only and in- cluded Vallisneria americana, Potomogeton perfolia- tus L. var. bupleruoides, Ceratophyllum demsersum, Najas sp., and Elodea occidentalis (Muenscher 1935, 1937). At present, Trapa is the second most abundant macrophyte in the tidal freshwater Hudson (Findlay, S., E. Blair, W. C. Nieder, E. Branaba, and S. Hoskins, 1997 unpublished report to New York Sea Grant, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York).Macrophytes in the tidal freshwater Hudson occupy  16% of the surface area of the river and are dominated by two species that occur in distinct, nearly monospe- cific beds. Vallisneria americana covers  10% of the surface area of the tidal Hudson and is most abundant in water between 0.5 and 1 m depth (Harley and Findlay 1994). Vallisneria is a native plant with submersed ribbon-like leaves. Plants are perennial and new leaves arise from overwintering roots in May to June. From late-July to mid-September biomass is maintained at peak dry mass abundance of up to 400 g/m (Harley and Findlay 1994). Beds of Trapa natans cover  6% of the surface area of the tidal Hudson and, like Val- lisneria, this plant is most abundant in shallow subtidalareas. Trapa has both floating rosette leaves that are held up by inflated leafstalks and submersed feather leaves. Plants are annual and sprout from large four- spined seeds in May and by mid June rosette leaves have broken to the surface of all but the deepest sites where growth occurs. From late July to mid-September, biomass is maintained at near peak dry biomass of up to 2000 g/m2 (Kiviat 1993).In this study we examine the differences in DO dy- namics in Trapa and Vallisneria beds with open ex- change to the main channel of the Hudson. The study focuses on sites that were located in close proximity to each other (Fig. 1), and high frequency DO mea- surements were made simultaneously at these sites us- ing moored, automatically recording instruments. Be- cause between-site differences in DO could be driven by a number of factors, we investigate the potential direct contribution of different plant species by use of modeling based on physiological measurements. We then compare the DO dynamics predicted by our model with those measured in the beds.

xmethods
Metabolism measurementsWithin macrophyte beds we estimated sediment, wa- ter column, and macrophyte metabolism (Fig. 2). Mac- rophyte production and respiration were based on es- timates of the biomass of photosynthetic and nonpho- tosynthetic plant tissue and laboratory measurements of biomass-specific metabolism of these tissues. For Vallisneria, plant tissue included roots and leaves. Tra- pa plant tissues include roots, stem, air bladders, rosette leaves, and feather leaves (Fig. 2). In the case of air bladders we assumed respiration equal to that measured in stems, as the high air storage in these tissues made short-term metabolic estimates unfeasible.Estimates of macrophyte tissue respiration and pro- duction were based on DO changes in incubations in the dark and over a light gradient, respectively (Harley and Findlay 1994). For these incubations we collected intact macrophytes during early morning. Material was transferred to coolers filled with Hudson River water and transported to the laboratory where plants were cut into separate tissue parts (Table 1). Separate Hudson River water was collected the prior evening and filtered with Whatman GF/F glass fiber filters (Whatman Sci- entific, Kent, UK). Immediately before incubations, this water was siphoned into 300-mL BOD bottles while being mixed to assure even distribution of initial DO between bottles. The remaining bottles were water controls or included plant tissue (dry mass  50 mg).Incubations were 3 h, during which temperatures were within 1 C of ambient river temperatures ( 22 C). DO consumption in dark bottles was esti- mated for photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic tissue (Table 1). For the photosynthetic tissues (leaves) we also determined net DO production at eight levels of photosynthetically active photons, varying between 15 and 2000  mol·m 2·s 1. Light levels were created with neutral-density screening as has been done to measure phytoplankton photosynthetic parameters in the Hud- son (Cole et al. 1992). At the end of all incubations, plant material was carefully removed and dried in order to transform DO changes to mass-specific rates. After plant material had been removed, DO was fixed im- mediately by the addition of manganese and base Wink- ler reagents and within 24 h DO was measured follow- ing sample acidification (Roland et al. 1999).For Trapa, biomass of photosynthetic and nonpho- tosynthetic tissue in beds was based on estimates of rosette leaf density in beds and biomass of plant parts associated with each rosette leaf. On 11 August floating rosette leaf density was obtained at five locations with- in the bed by counting abundance of rosettes within a 0.5-m2 frame. The biomass of plant tissue parts per rosette was based on whole plants harvested for pho- tosynthetic experiments. Five plants were divided into component parts and dry mass of each part was ob- tained. For Vallisneria, biomass of roots and stems was calculated as the average total biomass in beds between 0.5 and 1.5 m depth (Harley and Findlay 1994) and estimate of the relative masses of leaf and root from five plants harvested for photosynthetic measurements. These plants were also used to get average height of plants in the beds.To estimate sediment respiration, we relied on pre-vious measurements based on core incubations of sub-tidal sediment (J. L. Zelenke 1997, unpublished reportto the Hudson River Foundation [40 West 20th Street,New York, New York]: Tidal freshwater marshes of theHudson River as nutrient sinks: long-term retention anddenitrification). These measurements suggest a sedi-ment respiration of on average 0.8 g O2·m 2·d 1. Weassumed that photosynthesis on sediments was negli-gible in both beds. Water column respiration at bothsites was assumed to be equal to volumetric respirationin open water sites of the Hudson, or  0.3 g O ·m 3·d 1 2(Caraco et al. 2000). Water column photosynthesis was based on photosynthetic parameters of phytoplankton in the Hudson (Cole et al. 1992, Caraco et al. 1997) and models of light in the macrophyte beds (below).Field measurementsDO was measured at five sites with automatically recording YSI Endico sondes (UPG 6000 with pulsed O2 electrodes; Yellow Springs Instrument, Yellow Springs, Ohio, USA). In addition to DO, sondes re- corded temperature and water depth. Further, in some deployments sondes were equipped with turbidity sen- sors. Turbidity was standardized to a 20 NTU standard prior to each 5- to 15-d deployment. DO was stan- dardized to atmospheric saturation at the beginning of deployments. Electrode drift during deployment was detected by air saturation measurements at the end of deployment (Cole et al. 2000). Drift averaged 4% dur- ing deployments and never exceeded 13%. Errors as- sociated with drift were corrected for by a linear in- terpretation routine.During 1999, a single sonde was deployed in a 0.9- km2 Trapa bed located at km 139 of the Hudson River for 4 d in late July. Measurements were made at 5-min intervals during this deployment. During summer 2000, extensive measurements were made at a larger (1.1- km2) Trapa bed centered at km 173 with simultaneous measurements being made in a 0.6 km2 Vallisneria bed, and an adjacent open-water site in the tidal Hudson River (Fig. 1). For the Trapa site, we monitored DO at two locations: one located at the edge of the Trapabed (close to open water, Fig. 1) and one at a more interior site in the bed. This site was accessed through a narrow channel that runs into the bed. In all mac- rophyte sites during 2000, measurements were made at 10-min intervals for 32 d in July to August (three 10- to 12-d deployments) and 34 d (three 10- to 12-d de- ployments) in September to October at both the Trapa and Vallisneria sites. For the open water site, mea- surements were continuous for July through early Oc- tober and were made at 15-min intervals with deploy- ments averaging 2 wk. Water depth at the open water site was 9 m at mean low tide, and sondes were de- ployed at 2 m. Average depth in macrophyte beds ranged from 0.2 to 0.8 m at mean low tide. Sondes were deployed from 0.15 to 0.5 m above the sediment at these sites. When sondes were deployed DO was also measured with newly programmed sondes reading at 1-min intervals or with portable YSI meters. These measurements were within 0.3 mg/L of DO measured on moored sondes at the same time.In addition to intensive measurements made with deployed sondes, transects were run from adjoining open waters into Trapa and Vallisneria beds during August 1999 and 2000. Sondes programmed to take measurements at 1-min intervals were slowly towed from open waters into macrophyte beds. All measure- ments were at  0.2 m depth. The transect sites included the three large beds where we had moored sondes, six additional Trapa sites that ranged in size from  0.1 to 0.4 km2, and four additional Vallisneria sites that ranged in size from 0.3 to 0.7 km2.Light measurements were made using a LI-COR model LI-193SB spherical quantum sensor (LI-COR, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA) with a model LI-1000 data logger (Cole et al. 1992) within our intensively studied macrophyte beds and the adjoining channel (Fig. 1). Measurements were made on 11 August when mac- rophyte biomass had reached peak values. Measure- ments were made in air and at 0.1-m depth intervals to the base of the water column. Lastly, on three dates from July to September 2000, samples were taken dur- ing ebbing tide in the mid-Trapa site and adjacent chan- nel site (Fig. 1) for analysis of nitrate, ammonium, total N, phosphate, and total P (Lampman et al. 1999).Modeling DO dynamicsWe modeled DO dynamics in both Trapa and Val- lisneria beds. In the model, changes in DO are a func- tion of respiration (R) and gross primary production (GPP), horizontal advection (Adv.) and dispersion (Disp.), and air–water exchange (Atm.) as they change with both diurnal and tidal variation in light and depth (Fig. 2). Depth (z) variation influenced not only the light regime of plants and the extent to which areal based metabolism was concentrated in the water col- umn but in addition determined advective inputs of water and DO from the adjoining channel. The model was run at a 15-min time step ( t). Light and GPP were calculated at 0.1-m depth intervals from 0 m to the maximum depth of the water column and were summed for each time step. Adv. and Disp. are in grams per square meter input per time step. GPP, R, and Atm. are in grams per square meter per hour. DO is in milligrams per liter (grams per cubic meter). The model was ini- tialized with a DO of 7.5 mg/L (channel DO concen- trations during model run) and run for 2 d to allow model equilibrium before modeling days to be com- pared to output data. As our physiological and light data within macrophyte beds was taken during July– early August, we show model results only for this time period.The 1-m tidal range in depth of the water column was modeled as a sine function of time of day and day such thatdeptht   average depth  0.5 sin[0.5(time   day of year   205)] (1)where average depth is the depth at mid-tide in the macrophyte bed in meters. This function allowed tide to advance 1 h per day but did not take into account daily asynchronies that can occur in the river. The input of channel water to the beds during flooding tide (Adv.(In)) was calculated as:Adv.(In)   DOchannel(zt   zt 1) (2)where DOchannel is the DO concentration in the channel (7.5 mg/L in these model runs) and zt and zt 1 are the modeled depths of the water between time steps. Sim- ilarly the output of DO with ebbing tide isAdv.(Out)   DOt 1(zt 1   zt) (3)where DOt 1 is the DO in the macrophyte bed at time t 1.In addition to the above unidirectional inputs of wa- ter during flooding and ebbing tides, water may ex- change with the channel by dispersion (Disp.). We as- sumed that this exchange was proportional to velocity and a function of tidal exchange. Such thatDisp.   ABSOLUTE(zt   zt 1 )F(DOchannel   DOt 1 ) (4)where F is a dimensionless constant that we varied in different model runs from zero (no dispersive ex- change) to three (dispersive water exchange threefold advective exchange). Atmospheric inputs to the bed (Atm.) were calculated asAtm.   k(DOatm   DOt 1) (5)where DOatm is the concentration of DO associated with atmospherically equilibrated water and k is piston ve- locity for air–water exchange, which was varied from 0 to 0.033 m/h in different model runs. These values represent minimum and maximum scenarios as the ex- change in the quiescent waters of the macrophyte beds was likely less than the  0.033 m/h exchange found in the Hudson River (Caraco et al. 1999).The incoming potential radiation was modeled at each time step according to Iqbal (1983) as a function of latitude and day of year. Based on light measure- ments made at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies (Kelly 1993), actual incident light (Is), was estimated as 60% of potential. Light with depth (Iz) was modeled from time dependent incoming irradiance (Is) and extinction of light such thatI   I Te kdz. (6) zsT is the fraction of incoming light that is transmitted through surface waters (vs. being reflected or absorbed by floating vegetation), kd is the light extinction in the water due to plants, particles, and DOM, and z is the depth in meters. Parameters were fit for each bed based on light measurements with depth (Field measure- ments, above). We used these fitted parameters for all model scenario runs but one where we increased T 10- fold over those based on measurements to simulate production in beds with less plant biomass.Respiration was assumed to be light-independent and to, therefore, occur at a constant rate throughout the day and over depth (Table 1). Gross primary production of phytoplankton and macrophytes was related to light through a hyperbolic tangent model (Goldsborough and Kemp 1988, Cole et al. 1992, Harley and Findlay 1994). Light varied with depth and time and GPP for each depth and time interval was calculated asGPPt,z   biomasst,zGPPmaxtanh(Iz /Ik). (7)The maximum gross photosynthesis (GPPmax) and the light value where this maximum is approached (Ik) were fit using a modified Marquardt procedure to laboratory measurements of DO production (Metabolism mea- surements, above; Cole et al. 1992). Biomasst,z is the biomass of photosynthetic tissue at each depth interval. To estimate this, submersed leaves were assumed to stand upright in the water column unless the height of plants exceeded the height of the water column, at which point submersed tissue was assumed to bend 90  at the surface. Light for submersed tissue at the surface was, therefore, equal to TIs (Eq. 6). Light for floating vegetation (Trapa rosettes leaves) was modeled as Is.For all submersed plant tissue (all but Trapa rosette leaves) DO produced and consumed by photosynthesis and respiration were assumed to directly and instan- taneously contribute to DO changes in the water col- umn. For floating rosette leaves, we ran two extreme model scenarios, first where we assumed that the float- ing leaves did not contribute to water column DO (all DO produced/consumed was vented to the atmosphere) and second that, like submersed tissue, this DO had a direct and instantaneous effect on water column DO.

xresults
Incubations (3 h each) of plant tissue in the dark resulted in declines of DO that ranged from 1.5 to 5 mg/L. Dark incubation of filtered Hudson River water (e.g., controls without plant material) had negligible declines in DO in comparison ( 0.1 mg/L). The dif- ferent plant tissue consumed DO in the dark at rates that varied from 0.5 to 1.6 mg O2·g 1·h 1. Trapa feather leaves had the highest biomass specific respiration (R, Table 1).In the light incubations, for all leaves there was in- creasing DO production as light increased. The net pri- mary production (NPP) measured by these incubations switched from negative to positive values of photon influx at from 20 to 100  mol·m 2·s 1 with higher light values required for this switch in rosette leaves of Tra- pa. At the highest light levels, where DO production was maximum, DO levels rose up to 12 mg/L (140% saturation) during incubations. These values were not so high as to cause DO bubbles to form in the water.For all three leaves the gross primary production(GPP), calculated as the sum of NPP and R, was mod-eled well by the hyperbolic tangent model (Eq. 7, Fig.3);  96% of the variation in DO production was ex-plained by this model. The parameters of the modeldiffered somewhat between leaves. Ik of Trapa rosetteleaves was 250  mol·m 2·s 1, while I of Trapa feather kand Vallisneria leaves were almost identical at near 85 mol·m 2·s 1. GPPthree leaf types and was 11, 5.5, and 2 mg O2·g 1·h 1 for the Vallisneria, Trapa feather, and Trapa rosette leaves, respectively. We know of no other studies that have investigated the photosynthetic parameters of Trapa leaves. The photosynthetic parameters that we found for Vallisneria are very close to those found in a previous study (Harley and Findlay 1994).High respiration rates in Trapa beds were largely due to high plant biomass in these beds, rather than large differences in biomass-specific respiration estimates (Table 1). Estimated biomass of plant tissue was about six-fold greater in the Trapa than in the Vallis- neria bed (Table 1). For Trapa  50% of this biomass was in floating leaves, which contribute to the plant’s carbon balance but may not contribute to water column DO dynamics. Even considering the submersed bio- mass, however, Trapa biomass was almost three times that of Vallisneria. The respiration by plants in Val- lisneria beds was estimated at 0.1 g O2·m 2·h 1. The respiration of submersed plant tissue in Trapa beds was estimated 0.3 g O2·m 2·h 1 and the respiration of the total plant was 0.5 g O2·m 2·h 1. For both macrophyte beds, sediment respiration was estimated at 0.03 g O2·m 2·h 1 and water column respiration was 0.01 g O2·m 2·h 1 for a 1-m water column. Considering all components of respiration, Trapa beds had two and one-half to five-fold higher respiration than Vallisneria beds if we consider submersed vegetation only or in- clude floating leaves in our estimates.The biomass of submersed photosynthetic tissue(leaves) was  1.6-fold greater in the Trapa as com-pared to the Vallisneria beds, while the production perunit mass of leaf was about twofold greater for Val-lisneria than for Trapa (Fig. 3). Thus, given saturatinglight levels, GPP of submersed tissue would be 0.7 and0.6 g O2·m 2·h 1 for Vallisneria and Trapa, respec-tively. If we consider floating leaves in addition, GPPof Trapa plants would be 1.3 g O2·m 2·h 1 at saturatinglight conditions. By comparison, at the average chlo-rophyll a concentration of 4 mg/m3 (Caraco et al. 1997)and saturating light, we would expect a planktonic DOproduction of  0.05 g O ·m 2·h 1 in a 1-m water col- 2umn (based on a GPPmax of 14 mg O2·(mg chlorophyll a) 1·h 1, Cole et al. 1992). The extent to which these maximum productions are approached depends on the light level in macrophyte beds compared to the Ik values for photosynthesis. Light regimeAt a given depth light in the water column of mac- rophyte beds and in Trapa beds in particular is con- siderably lower than in the main channel of the river. In the open channel, based on light measured with depth (Fig. 4), we estimate T and kd values (Eq. 6) of 0.74 and 2.4 m 1 depth, respectively. For Vallisneria, we estimate T and kd of 0.55 and 4.1 m 1, respectively, while for Trapa, these values were 0.01 and 3.9 m 1, respectively. Thus, in the channel, Vallisneria bed, and Trapa bed only 47%, 24%, and 0.5%, respectively, of incident light (Is, Eq. 6) reached 0.2 m depth. For Trapa beds, even at 0.05 m (immediately below floating leaves) light would only be 0.8% of Is.DO dynamicsContinuous DO measurements for 1999 and 2000 show that in the large Trapa beds, DO varied dramat- ically over short time scales and that low DO events were common (Fig. 5). For the 0.9-km2 Trapa bed located at km 139, during July 1999 DO varied within a 6-h period between 0 and 8.2 mg/L. For the deploy- ments during July and August 2000 (Fig. 1B), DO var- ied between 0 and 8.0 mg/L at the edge of the bed and between 0 and 6 mg/L at the inner site. For September to October, DO ranged from 0 to 8.5 mg/L at both the edge and inner sites. Depth profiles suggested that these recorded changes occurred throughout the water col- umn.In the Trapa bed, the variation in DO was not related to a diurnal cycle but occurred on a 12.5-h tidal cycle (Fig. 6A, C). At, or just prior to, high tide DO levels were highest, and at the edge site, were generally co- equal with channel values (7–8 mg/L). In the inner site DO values peeked near the same time, but even these peak values were frequently lower than main channel DO values (Fig. 6C). At both inner and edge sites DO declined consistently as tide ebbed, reaching lows of 0 to 2.5 mg/L at low tide. During each flood tide, DO increased rapidly, reaching near peak values  1 and 3 h after the beginning of flood tide at the edge site and inner sites, respectively (Fig. 6C).In the Vallisneria bed, DO was less dynamic than in the Trapa bed. In July–August and September–October, DO varied between 6.3 and 11.8 mg/L and 7.2 and 12.3 mg/L, respectively (Fig. 5, 6B). DO values were gen- erally lowest in late night to early morning and gen- erally increased by 2–4 mg/L to reach peak values dur- ing early afternoon to dusk (Fig. 6A, B). The daily cycles were not as regular as the tidal cycles we ob- served in the Trapa bed. This is likely due to the fact that Vallisneria beds experience tidal flushing asyn- chronously with diurnal cycles.In addition to the difference in pattern of DO decline in Trapa and Vallisneria, the beds have very different frequency of low DO events. In the Trapa bed during July 1999, DO values below 5 and 2.5 mg/L occurred 51% and 30% of the time, respectively. Similarly dur- ing 2000, for July and August 2000 DO values  5 mg/ L occurred 31% and 71% of the time for the edge and center sites in the Trapa bed, respectively, and values  2.5 mg/L occurred 12% and 42% of the time at the edge and center of the Trapa beds, respectively. In contrast, for July to August in the Vallisneria bed, DO never dropped below 5 mg/L and DO above 7.5 mg/L occurred 65% of the time.Measurements along transects into macrophyte bed sites show the same species driven difference in DO as we observed from our large intensively studied sites (Fig. 7). That is, compared to open water sites, large Trapa beds have substantially lower DO while large Vallisneria beds had substantially greater DO than that of adjoining open waters. The DO differences between beds seemed to decline with bed size, and for the small Trapa beds we did not find the large DO depletions that were found in the large beds. DO values in these beds were never  5 mg/L; the lowest DO value foundwas 6 mg/L or  1.5 mg/L lower than the values in the adjoining open water site at this time. These data sug- gest that the low DO events in Trapa beds may be restricted to large beds. These large beds make up  50% of the total area of Trapa in the river.NutrientsNitrogen concentrations in the main channel of the Hudson River were substantially higher than in the Tra- pa bed. During summer 2000 in the channel NO3, NH4, and TN averaged 35, 2.3, and 60  mol/L, respectively (Fig. 8). These values are close to long-term averages observed in the channel of the Hudson (Lampman et al. 1999). In the Trapa bed NO3, NH4, and TN con- centrations were 9.0, 1.6, and 30  mol/L, respectively. Thus, both DIN and TN were depleted during these ebbing tide samples by close to 30  mol/L with respect to channel concentrations.Like nitrogen, phosphorus was lower in the Trapa bed than in the main channel but depletion was pro- portionally less. PO4 and TP averaged 0.67 and 1.8  mol/L in the channel and 0.37 and 0.93  mol/L in the Trapa bed. Thus, the depletions of PO4 and TP were 0.30 and 0.87  mol/L, respectively. On average, DIN depletion was 90  that of PO4 and TN depletion was 33  that of TP. These depletion values never approached the Redfield ratio of 16 DIN/PO4 and only approached this depletion ratio expected for plant up- take on one date for TN/TP (Fig. 8C). The high de- pletion of N with respect to P could indicate that part of the uptake within beds is due to denitrification.Model resultsModel scenarios were run for both species, consid- ering different Atm. and Disp. values. In addition, for Trapa we ran scenarios with different light input and exclusion or inclusion of emergent tissue in the DO balance. The model was run for 16 d in July (days of year 215–231). For seven of the scenario runs, average predicted daily values of NEP and DO for days 217– 231 are presented in Table 2 (S1–S7) and detailed re- sults for two days (day of year 221–222) are shown graphically (Fig. 9) and compared to measurements for those same dates (Fig. 6). Although only NEP and DO results are shown in the Table 2 and Fig. 9, we discuss components of the model including GPP, Atm., and Adv.When the model is run with measured light and pho-tosynthetic parameters (Figs. 3, 4), modeled GPP forVallisneria and Trapa averaged 3.6 and 12.6 gO2·m 2·d 1, respectively. For Trapa most of this GPPoccurred by floating leaves and GPP of submersed tis-sue was only 0.5 g O ·m 2·d 1 or  5% of total GPP. 2Net ecosystem production (NEP) is GPP minus plant,sediment, and planktonic respiration. Within Vallis-neria beds hourly NEP varied between  0.2 and 0.5g O2·m 2·h 1 throughout the day. Peak values occurredduring midday low tides and for day 221, two distinctpeaks in NEP occur (Fig. 9A). The average daily NEPfor days 217–231 was 0.13 g O2·m 2·d 1 (Table 2) andthe daily NEP varied between  0.06 and 0.29 gO2·m 2·d 1 depending on the timing of low tides duringthe day. For Trapa beds hourly NEP varied between 0.53 g O ·m 2·h 1 at night to 0.52 g O ·m 2·h 1 during 22daytime (Fig. 9A). Considering only submersed veg-etation, hourly NEP was always negative and variedbetween  0.35 and  0.25 g O ·m 2·h 1 (9A). The daily 2average NEP with the inclusion and exclusion of the floating rosette leaves was  0.34 and  7.2 g O2·m 2·d 1, respectively (Table 2). The metabolic bal- ance for the entire Trapa plants (e.g., excluding sedi- ment and planktonic metabolism, Fig. 2) was positive and averaged 0.5 g O2·m 2·d 1.Compared to metabolism, atmospheric exchange(Atm.) in the Vallisneria bed was relatively low evenwhen k values (Eq. 5) used in the model were as highas the more turbulent channel. Atm. varied between0.04 g O ·m 2·h 1 near sunrise to  0.05 g O ·m 2·h 1 22prior to sunset. Peak daytime atmospheric exchange is, therefore,  10% of peak daytime NEP (Fig. 9A). Mod- eled Atm. in Trapa beds was highly dependent on whether floating leaves were considered to contribute to water column DO dynamics. When floating leaves were included in the water column DO model, the mod- el predicts a large diurnal shift in Atm. from  0.3 to 0.3 g O2·m 2·h 1; when excluded modeled Atm. varied between 0.14 and 0.3 g O2·m 2·h 1 and variation was related to tidal cycle with highest atmospheric ex- change at the end of ebbing tide.As advective inputs depend only on channel DO val- ues and not DO within the macrophyte beds, Adv. input of DO during flooding tides was the same for all model scenario runs. Adv. reached maximum values during mid flood of 1.8 g O2·m 2·h 1 and was 7.5 g O2·m 2 per 6.2-h tidal cycle. These advective inputs would have dramatically different impacts on DO dynamics depending on the ambient DO in the bed. When DO concentrations in the bed were near 7.5 mg/L (channel DO values for the model period), there was little im- pact; when values of DO in the bed differ greatly from 7.5 mg/L the impact of advective inputs can be sub- stantial. For example, if DO values were 0 mg/L at the beginning of low tide and depth of the water column were 0.5 m, DO could increase to 5 mg/L by advective inputs alone during the flood tide. Dispersive inputs that occur would increase further the DO input during flooding tide and depend strongly on F values (Eq. 4). These inputs are considered in the context of their im- pact on DO dynamics.We were able to model the DO dynamics in the Val- lisneria bed well in a scenario that considered only NEP and Adv. and considered Disp. and Atm. to be zero (Fig. 9C; Table 2, S1). For these conditions the model predicted diurnal DO changes from 7.2 to 9.8 mg/L with low values near sunrise to highest values at the low tide just prior to sunset (Fig. 9C). Actual datashow diurnal range of 7.0–9.7 mg/L for the same time period (Fig. 6B). The model also predicted the lack of a smooth rise in DO during the day, which in the model is driven by proportionally higher production at low than high tides and advective inputs of channel DO during flooding tides. Including Atm. at maximum like- ly values or Disp. with F   0.5 did not substantially alter model output as Vallisneria DO were not greatly different from either channel DO or atmospheric sat- uration (8.5 mg/L). Higher F values caused the daytime peak DO to narrow and decrease in magnitude. For example, at F   3 the modeled peak daytime DO is only 8.4 mg/L. DO dynamics at the inner site in the Trapa bed were modeled well considering only submersed tissue NEP and Adv. (Figs. 6C and 9D, S2). The model predicted dynamics to be tidally dominated with little diurnal pattern in DO dynamics. Low values of DO (0 mg/L) occur during each low tide and highs of near 5 mg/L during mid flood (Table 2, S2). For the edge site the higher DO values at low tide were predicted relatively well by adding a dispersive DO input driven by an F   0.3; however, we predicted lower DO at high tide than were actually observed (Fig. 6C, Fig. 9D, S3; Table 2, S3). When substantially higher F values were used we were able to model high DO at high tide, however, DO did not drop to the low values we ob- served at low tide (Fig. 9E, S4) and the tidal variation in DO when a value of F   3 was used was only 1.5 mg/L. Inclusion of atmospheric exchange in the model also reduced tidal DO variation to less than that actually observed (Fig. 9E, S5)In all model scenarios for Trapa where floating leaves were included in the DO balance of the water column, resulting DO dynamics did not resemble ob- served dynamics in Trapa beds (Fig. 9F, S7). For these scenarios a strong diurnal pattern in DO is predicted with DO dropping to  4 mg/L and rising to up to 16 mg/L. Inclusion of Atm. and Disp. dampens this diurnal pattern but still predicts a diurnal rather than a tidally based pattern in DO, and predicts far higher average DO values than we have observed in Trapa beds. A diurnal pattern of DO dynamics with higher than ob- served average DO is also modeled if we increase light penetration in beds as might occur in less dense beds of Trapa. For example, if we run a model scenario with 90% of light being absorbed in the surface layer rather than the 99% we measure (T   0.1 vs.   0.01, Eq. 6), we predict a diurnal pattern in DO with DO remaining near 7.5 mg/L throughout daylight hours and declining to 2–4 mg/L during nighttime low tides (Fig. 9F, S6).

xdiscussion
Our data clearly demonstrate strong differences in DO dynamics between macrophyte beds dominated by different species (Figs. 5 and 6). These differences in- clude the pattern of DO cycling and, most importantly, the frequency of low DO events that can be harmful to fish and invertebrates. Low DO events were common in the beds dominated by the introduced species (Trapa natans) but never occurred in beds of the native (Val- lisneria americana). Our model could reproduce the very different DO dynamics of Vallisneria beds and Trapa beds (Table 2, S1 vs. S2) with all aspects of the model identical except the balance between GPP and R of submersed plant tissue (daytime NPP); sediment and watercolumn GPP and R and Adv., Disp. and Atm. were identical between scenario runs 1 and 2 (Fig. 9C, D). Further, the different plant R and GPPs in these scenario runs are based on measurements made in this study (Table 1, Figs. 3, 4) and were not manipulated parameters within the model. The low NPP of sub- mersed Trapa tissue (GPP   R) is due to high biomass of floating leaves that allow only 1% of incoming solar radiation to reach submersed leaves (Fig. 4).According to our model, the strong DO decline in Trapa beds during daytime ebbing tides is dependent on the high degree of shading by emergent leaves. Us- ing our model to investigate this impact, we found that for Trapa beds that were not so dense and allowed even 10% of incoming light to penetrate through the water column, NEP during daytime would be balanced rather than negative and the occurrence of low DO events would be less frequent and less severe (Fig. 9F). Many of the smaller Trapa beds in the Hudson appear to have a higher percentage of open water (and are less dense). This difference in plant density, in addition to higher dispersive water exchange in smaller beds, could ex- plain why we did not observe extremely low DO in small Trapa beds (Fig. 7). Whatever the cause, low DO events may be limited to the  3 km2 of the river oc- cupied by large Trapa beds rather than the full 6 km2 occupied by beds of all sizes. The 3-km2 area represents  15% of the total macrophyte area in the tidal fresh- water Hudson. Hypoxia in these areas could have sig- nificant consequences.In the Hudson, as is true in many systems, macro- phyte beds are critical nursery habitats for fish (Kiviat 1993, Limburg et al. 1986). Both resident and anad- romous fish rely heavily on these beds for the devel- opment of the juveniles, which are abundant during July to September. Hypoxia in macrophyte beds during this time-period is potentially of substantial signifi- cance. A preliminary study suggested that many ju- venile fish, including striped bass (Morone saxatillas), and many clupeid species, forage in Trapa beds during high tide but are leaving beds during ebbing tide (T. W. Coote 2000, unpublished manuscript [report to the Polgar Fellowship Foundation: Use of a periodically anoxic Trapa bed by fishes in the Hudson River]). These species may face substantial predation risk as they leave the cover of beds. This danger could be accentuated, as the water leaving Trapa beds at the end of ebb tide has turbidities of only 1–3 NTU ( 10  lower than the main channel of the river, Fig. 7A). The relatively clear water at the edge of the Trapa bed could enhance the risk of predation by visual predators, in- cluding birds and larger fish.In addition to impacting the quality of macrophyte beds as habitats, low DO can also impact biogeochem- ical cycles within Trapa beds. For example, the alter- nation between oxic and hypoxic conditions may en- hance denitrification, which can increase gaseous loss- es of N (Knowles 1982, Seitzinger and Kroeze 1998). In agreement with this possibility, preliminary mea- surements of nitrate levels within Trapa beds were  30% of nitrate levels in the main channel of the Hud- son during July to September while PO4 depletions were proportionally far lower (Fig. 8). The low NO3 in Trapa beds suggests that these beds may be impor- tant sinks for N. In the  3 km2 of large Trapa beds within the tidal Hudson, at least 0.6   107 m3 of water enter and leave the Trapa beds each day due to daily tidal movement. Thus, given an N depletion of 30  mol/L in Trapa beds, about 1.8   108 mmol of NO per day may be consumed in beds. This represents  20% of the average daily summertime export of N from the tidal freshwater Hudson (Lampman et al. 1999) or close to all of the N entering this section of the river in point sources (Lampman et al.1999). If this N is being consumed by plant uptake it can potentially be made available after plant decline in the fall. If the N is being consumed by denitrification, it not only implies that Trapa beds could be hot spots of nitrous oxide production in the river (Cole and Caraco 2001) but also that the N depletion could be a more permanent sink. Thus, the hypoxia caused by Trapa could have significant geochemical as well as habitat consequences to the Hudson.Hypoxia can occur in the absence of human activity, but it is well recognized that human activity can in- crease the frequency, extent, or duration of hypoxic events (D’Elia 1987). In general, two human activities are frequently associated with increased hypoxia in aquatic systems. First, the direct load of organics or other reduced substance to aquatic systems can con- sume DO throughout the water column (Clark et al. 1995). Second, humans can load nutrients to nutrient limited aquatic system and the greater production, and subsequent export, of organic material to bottom waters frequently leads to hypoxia (Elmgren 1989, Rabalais et al. 1996). Other human induced causes of hypoxia, including species introductions, are not widely rec- ognized, and indeed the importance of individual spe- cies to the control of ecosystem function has only re- cently become widely recognized (e.g., Jones et al. 1997, Vanni et al. 1997, Vitousek et al. 1997, Strayer et al. 1999, Vander Zanden et al. 1999). To date, there are only a few studies that have linked species intro- ductions with DO declines (Effler et al. 1998, Caraco et al. 2000), and we know of no other studies that have linked these introductions to severe hypoxia. This study demonstrates this connection for a large aquatic system.
