xabstract
The Mediterranean population of the exotic eastern mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki (Agassiz 1859) (Osteichthyes, Poeciliidae) has been held responsible for causing eutrophication due to zooplankton re- moval and phytoplankton enhancement, however no experimental evidence exists of this. To test this allegation, an enclosure experiment was conducted in spring in an oligohaline coastal marsh. The manipulation of fish density had profound effects on zooplankton, whose density greatly decreased when the occurrence of mosquitofish increased. Cladocerans and ostracods were more affected by mosquitofish than cyclopoid copepods, whilst rotifer density was not modified. Changes in zooplankton density did not cascade to lower trophic levels as no differences were observed between the chlorophyll concentration in fish and fish-less enclosures. This is because zooplankton was dominated by species with low filter-feeding rates, such as small cladocerans. In consequence, the total macrophyte standing crop was not affected. The only benthic macroinvertebrate species whose density increased in the absence of eastern mosquitofish was the mud snail P. acuta. Higher numbers of snails explain why the standing crop of the filamentous green algae Oedogonium sp. decreased in fish-less enclosures. The density of chironomid midge larvae did not increase in fish-less enclosures, because eastern mosquitofish forage on them mainly during summer, when zooplankton has already been depleted; nor were damselflies, probably because they are too large. Nitrogen concentration decreased after fish exclusion, but phosphorus concentration remain unchanged. In con- clusion, it was found that the eastern mosquitofish affect zooplankton of the Mediterranean oligohaline lagoons considerably, but they do not enhance phytoplankton growth, because the system is bottom- controlled by submerged macrophytes.

xintroduction
The eastern mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki (Agassiz 1859) (Osteichthyes, Poeciliidae) is a small North American fish widely introduced in warm temperate areas all over the world to con- trol malarial mosquitoes (Lever 1997). The spe- cies arrived in the Mediterranean region during 1920s and since then has colonised most of the lakes, rivers and marshes of the area (Bruno 1987; Lever 1997; Cabral and Marques 1999;Doadrio 2001). All over the area it has been blamed for competing with the native fish and threatening them with extinction (Bruno 1987; Lever 1997; Elvira 1998; Doadrio 2001), although this is still a controversial issue (Crivelli 1995). Furthermore, it has been blamed for causing eutrophication due to zooplankton removal and phytoplankton enhancement (Melotti et al. 1983 quoted by Bruno 1987).Previous experiments carried out in artificial pools and ponds stocked with the closely related western mosquitofish Gambusia affinis Baird and Girard, 1853 (Hurlbert et al. 1972; Hurlbert and Mulla 1981) have indeed demonstrated zoo- plankton depletion and phytoplankton enhance- ment where fish occurred. Furthermore, stomach content analysis has demonstrated that the Med- iterranean populations of the eastern mosquito- fish forage largely on zooplankton (Crivelli and Boy 1987; Vargas 1993; Cabral et al. 1998; Garcia-Berthou 1999), which suggest that they may enhance phytoplankton due to herbivores depletion in agreement with the trophic cascade theory (Carpenter et al. 1985). However, there is no experimental evidence demonstrating such a phenomenon neither a negative impact of eastern mosquitofish occurrence on submerged vegeta- tion. The aim of this paper is testing whether the occurrence of eastern mosquitofish has a detri- mental effect on submerged macrophytes due to phytoplankton enhancement.

xmethods
Experimental design and samplingThe experiment was conducted in the littoral area of a small fishless pond (area: 725 m2; average depth: 1.3 m) in Delta del Llobregat Natural Reserves (41° 18¢N, 2° 5¢E). Salinity was 2 g l) 1. Water turbidity was high in winter and decreased throughout spring, thus allowing the development of submerged macrophytes, mainly Potamogeton pectinatus and Chara aspera. Helophytes were represented by a small strand of Scirpus littoralis in the southern shore. Daphnia pulex dominated zooplankton in late winter, but was replaced by Ceriodaphnia quadr- angula and Chydorus sphaericus in spring and summer.Six cylindrical enclosures (bottom surface: 1.77 m2; average water level: 1.2 m) were in- stalled in the pond on April 7th, 1999, after col- lection of six water plankton and macrophyte samples. Samples were also collected from each enclosure (see below). Enclosures were made of fibreglass coated with polyethylene. Early spring was chosen for enclosure deployment because this is when P. pectinatus germinates and hence is more vulnerable to high water turbidity due tophytoplankton enhanced by eastern mosquito- fish. Enclosures were base-less and penetrated 10 cm into the sediment in order to prevent any exchange with the outside. Macrophytes occurred within the enclosures at their natural density within the pond. Enclosures were not enriched with zooplankton.Two treatments (fish occurrence and fish ab- sence) were assigned randomly to the enclosures, with three replicates for each treatment. Three enclosures were stocked with 10 mosquitofish (5 males and 5 females) per enclosure (length: 2.15±0.41 cm; weight: 0.15±0.02 g), thus result- ing in an initial stocking biomass of 0.71 g m)3.The experiment finished 71 days later, on June 17th, 1999. Integrated water column sam- ples were collected with a PVC pipe (5 cm inter- nal diameter) from the six enclosures for measurement of zooplankton density and chlo- rophyll-a, nitrate, total ammonia and dissolved phosphorus concentrations. Triplicate samples were taken from each enclosure and filtered in the field through a 60 lm mesh sieve. Animals retained in the net were collected and preserved in 5% formalin. A plankton net was not used because the macrophyte density and height were too high. Filtered water was collected in plastic bottles and stored in a shaded place for less than 3 h.Once in the laboratory, a 500 ml aliquot of each water sample was filtered through a GFH filter (0.45lm mesh size). Filters were treated with acetone for chlorophyll extraction and the chlorophyll-a concentration was measured with a spectrophotometer (Clescer et al. 1998). Total ammonia was measured using flow injection analysis; dissolved nitrite and nitrate concentra- tions were measured by ionic cromatography; and reactive dissolved phosphorus was analysed using the ascorbic acid method (Clescer et al. 1998). Zooplankton samples were studied at 20 magnification under a dissection microscope. Individuals were counted and identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level.Five submerged macrophyte samples were also collected from each enclosure by means of a stove pipe sampler (Clescer et al. 1998) with an internal diameter of 20 cm. Once in the labora- tory, macrophytes were carefully rinsed with tap water in order to remove all the macroinvertebrates. Then, macrophytes were identified to the lowest possible taxonomical level, dried at 100 °C for 48 h and weighed. Rinsing water was filtered through a 0.5 mm sieve and the retained material was stained with Bengal Rose. Macroin- vertebrates were identified to the order or family level and counted under a dissection microscope at 10  magnification. Five 50 g sediment sam- ples were also taken from each enclosure in or- der to measure the density of chironomid midge larvae. After sample collection, macrophytes were harvested and the mosquitofish collected with a scoop net.StatisticsPrior to analysis, the chlorophyll and nutrient data were log-transformed to ensure a normal sample distribution. In the same way, macroin- vertebrate and zooplankton numbers were trans- formed as X¢ = log(x+1). A Student’s t test was done to compare the final averages of all the transformed parameters, at a significance level of P<0.05 (Sokal and Rohlf 1981). Data are always reported as average ±standard deviation.

xresults
The conditions in the enclosures at the beginning of the experiment are shown in Table 1. By the end of the experiment, the herbivorous cyclopoid copepods Eucyclops macrurus and Halicyclops neglectus occurred in all the enclosures (Fig- ure 1), but in both cases the density was signifi- cantly lower in the fish enclosures (t-Student’s test; P=0.004 for E. macrurus and P=0.023 for H. neglectus). A similar pattern was noted for the cladocerans Chydorus sphaericus (Student’s t test; P<0.001) and Ceriodaphnia quadrangula (Stu- dent’s t test; P=0.015) and the ostracod Cyprid- opsis vidua (Student’s t test; P=0.031) (Figure 1). Other cladocerans (Bosmina longirrostris and Daphnia pulex) occurred only at low numbers in a few samples and no significant differences were observed between fish and fish-less enclosures (Student’s t test; P>0.05 in both cases) (Fig- ure 1). The same was true for the rotifer Lecane lamellata (Student’s t test; P>0.05) (Figure 1).Total ammonia concentration was significantly lower in the fish enclosures than in the fish-less ones (t-Student’s test; P<0.001), but the oppo- site was true for nitrate concentration (Figure 1). On the other hand, phosphate and chlorophyll-a concentrations were similar for both treatments (Student’s t test; P>0.05).Potamogeton pectinatus was the only recorded vascular macrophyte and its standing crop was not affected by changes in fish abundance (t-Student’s test; P>0.05) (Figure 1). The chara- cean Chara aspera was usually scarce but very abundant in some enclosures, although differ- ences were not significant (Student’s t test; P>0.05). The filamentous green algae Oedogoni- um sp. was also abundant but its standing crop was significantly higher in the fish enclosures than in those without fish (Student’s t test; P=0.031). Total macrophyte biomass was not affected by changes in fish density (Student’s t test; P>0.05).The community of epiphytic invertebrates was dominated by the larvae of chironomid midges and P. acuta (Figure 1). The density of P. acuta was significantly higher in the fish-less enclosures (Student’s t test; P<0.029). However, no sig- nificant differences were observed between treat- ments for the density of epiphytic chironomid midge larvae and that of damselfly nymphs (Stu- dent’s t test; P>0.05 in both cases). The larvae of chironomid midges were the only macroinver- tebrates found in the sediment (Figure 1) and no significant difference was found between their density in both types of enclosures (Student’s t test; P>0.05).The final mosquito density in the fish enclo- sures was 53.3±12.5 individuals per enclosure, most of them being the offspring of the adults stocked at the beginning of the trial. The final adult density was 7.2±1.4 individuals per enclo- sure, thus showing that some adults died during the trial. The final average biomass in fish enclo- sures was 4.01±1.72 g m)3. No mosquitofish was found inside the fish-less enclosures.

xdiscussion
The main shortcoming of experiments with mos- quitofish conducted in predator-free ponds and enclosures is quick crowding due to uncontrolled reproduction, that may lead to an unrealistic population density (Hurlbert et al. 1972; Hurl- bert and Mulla 1981). This phenomenon also839prevent a gradient design, as commonly used with other species (Lazzaro et al. 1992; Cardona et al. 2001), unless an unrealistic monosex popu- lation is used. In order to prevent these artefacts, all the experimental units of the present experi- ment had a wooden perch that facilitated the ac- cess of night herons. Furthermore, enclosures were not covered, hence allowing the access of flying adult odonates and carnivorous coleopter- ans. As a result, nymphs of dragonfly, but not those of beetle, where found within the sub- merged vegetation of all the enclosures. Unfortu- nately, other predators, like grass snakes and pond turtles, remained excluded, as they failed to gain access to the enclosures. Nevertheless, the final fish density was similar to that reported for other ponds in the area in late spring (Cardona, unpublished data) and hence results are supposed to be realistic.The occurrence of eastern mosquitofish had profound effects on zooplankton, whose density decreased greatly. Previous experiments con- ducted at Delta del Llobregat demonstrated that cladoceran density decreased when local fish spe- cies occur (Cardona et al. 2001), but the effects of eastern mosquitofish were far more devastating and resulted in extremely low densi- ties of cladocerans. These results are hardly sur- prising, as eastern mosquitofish of all size ranges are known to prey intensely on planktonic crus- taceans, mainly cladocerans (Vargas 1993; Gis- bert et al. 1996, 1998; Garcia-Berthou 1999), but stress the threat of eastern mosquitofish for local fish species due to exploitative competition.Cladocerans were more negatively affected by eastern mosquitofish than cyclopoid copepods, a result already reported for the western mosquito- fish (Hurlbert et al. 1972; Hurlbert and Mulla 1981) and other zooplanktivorous fish (Threlkeld 1987; Lazzaro et al. 1992; Hrba ́ cek 1994; Cardona et al. 2001). Young eastern mosquito- fish are also known to consume rotifers (Gisbert et al. 1996; Cabral et al. 1998), but the density of these invertebrates was not affected by changes in fish density. Probably, they were depleted by mosquitofish in the fish enclosures and outcom- peted by cladocerans in the fish-less enclosures, as already reported by Hurlbert et al. (1972).Changes in zooplankton density did not cas- cade to lower trophic levels as no differences  were observed between the chlorophyll concen- tration of fish and fish-less enclosures. This is because in fish-less enclosures zooplankton was dominated by small cladocerans with low filter- feeding rates (Reynolds 1994; Bro ̈ nmark and Hansson 1998), some of which are known to be unable to control phytoplankton in the absence of predators (Threlkeld, 1987; Cardona et al. 1996). Indeed, available evidence suggests that only large daphnids exhibit rates of filter-feeding high enough to deplete phytoplankton in a predator-fee environment (Lazzaro et al. 1992; Reynolds 1994; Hrba ́ cek 1994; Cardona et al. 1996) and previous experiments demonstrating phytoplankton enhancement by weastern mos- quitofish involved depletion of several Daphnia species (Hurlbert et al. 1972; Hurlbert and Mu- lla 1981). Large daphnids were very scarce throughout spring in the fish and fish-less enclo- sures and so the phytoplankton biomass was controlled by nutrient availability and competi- tion with macrophytes, i.e., the system was bot- tom-controlled and the light conditions in the pond probably favored the alternative macro- phytes-dominated stable equilibria (Scheffer et al. 1993). In such a situation, it is unlikely that mosquitofish negatively affect macrophytes due to phytoplankton enhancement. Interestingly, nitrate concentration was higher in fish enclo- sures, a result that might be caused by fish mortality or heron defecation if they visited fish enclosures more often than the fish-less ones. Unfortunately, information about heron visits to the enclosures is not available.Large daphnid species occur in Mediterranean ponds mainly during the cold season (Alonso 1985; Pretus 1991). As spring goes on, they are replaced by small cladocerans even in fish-less enclosures, because the latter do better with a shorter food supply (Romanovsky and Feniova 1985). This suggest that the system may be top- controlled in winter and so that fish may have higher effects of phytoplankton in that season. However, mosquitofish density drops sharpingly in the cold season (Ferna ́ ndez-Delgado 1989; Vargas and De Sostoa 1996; Ferna ́ ndez-Delgado and Rossomanno 1997; Cabral and Marques 1999; Garcia-Berthou 1999) and so zooplank- ton density is probably not affected by fish predation.Eastern mosquitofish also forage on benthic invertebrates (Gisbert et al. 1996; Cabral et al. 1998; Garcia-Berthou 1999) and are expected to negatively affect them. Surprisingly, the only spe- cies whose density increased in the fish-less enclo- sures was P. acuta. Adult gastropods are seldom consumed by eastern mosquitofish (Crivelli and Boy 1987; Vargas 1993;Cabral et al. 1998; Gar- cia-Berthou 1999), which suggests that the effect reported here may be due to egg predation, which is not always detected in stomach contents analysis. An alternative is that snails escaped from fish enclosures by crawling outside or that heron preyed on them. Depletion of snails ex- plains why the standing crop of the filamentous green algae Oedogonium sp. increased in the fish enclosures. Conversely, the density of snails and the standing crop of Oedogonium sp. were unaf- fected when the density of a local fish species was manipulated in a similar experiment conducted in the same pond (Cardona et al. 2001).Western mosquitofish of all sizes are known to forage on chironomid larvae (Crivelli and Boy 1987; Vargas 1993; Gisbert et al.1996; Cabral et al. 1998; Garcia-Berthou 1999) but the density of these insects did not increase in fish-less enclo- sures. This is because predation pressure on chir- onomids increases as fish grow (Crivelli and Boy 1987; Vargas 1993; Cabral et al. 1998; Garcia- Berthou 1999) and is greater in late summer, when fish density is higher and large females be- come abundant (Ferna ́ ndez-Delgado 1989; Var- gas and De Sostoa 1996; Ferna ́ ndez-Delgado and Rossomanno 1997; Cabral and Marques 1999). Indeed, eastern mosquitofish usually replace cla- docerans with insects as main preys in summer (Crivelli and Boy 1987; Cabral et al. 1998). This replacement may be due to the higher energetic requirement of larger fish or a consequence of zooplankton depletion. The sharp decrease in zooplankton density in the fish enclosures from early April to mid-June strongly supports the lat- ter hypothesis. Damselflies were not affected, probably because they were too large.Fish have also been blamed for causing eutro- phication due to nutrient release from benthic prey (Northcote 1998; Persson 1997) and mosqui- tofish predation on benthic invertebrates suggest that this may also be true. However, mosquitofish did not affected the density of benthic prey and
benthic foraging was probably insufficient to cre- ate bioturbation.In conclusion, eastern mosquitofish have important effects on the zooplankton of oligoha- line lagoons, but they do not enhance phyto- plankton growth when macrophytes occur, because the system is bottom-controlled. Hence, indirect negative effects of eastern mosquitofish on submerged macrophytes are unlikely.
