xabstract
We investigated the effects of an exotic snail, the golden apple snail (Po- macea canaliculata) on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in tropical wetland eco- systems. This large snail (up to 80-mm shell height) has invaded large parts of Southeast Asia during recent decades. A survey of natural wetlands in Thailand showed that high densities of the snail were associated with almost complete absence of aquatic plants, high nutrient concentrations, and high phytoplankton biomass, that is, a complete shift in both ecosystem state and function. A field experiment demonstrated that grazing by the snail can cause the loss of aquatic plants, a change toward dominance of planktonic algae, and thereby a shift toward turbid water. Estimates of biologically fixed nutrients released through snails grazing on aquatic plants revealed that phosphorus releases were sufficient to explain the recorded increase in phytoplankton biomass. Hence, our study demonstrates how an herbivore may trigger a shift from clear water and macrophyte dominance to a turbid state dominated by planktonic algae. This shift and the continuing aggressive invasion of this exotic species are detrimental to the integrity and functioning of wetland ecosystems, and to the services these provide in Southeast Asia.

xintroduction
Invasion by exotic species has been identified as one of the major threats to global biodiversity (Buchan and Padilla 1999, Chapin et al. 2000, Kolar and Lodge 2000, Sala et al. 2000, Strayer 2001), and during the last decade there has been an increasing concern about the ecological consequences of biodiversity loss (Til- man 1999, Chapin et al. 2000, Loreau et al. 2001). Moreover, both loss of native species and addition of exotic species may have dramatic effects on ecosystem functioning by altering assemblages of species-specific traits, which can influence ecosystem processes. Hence, when the strength and direction of species interactions are altered through addition or removal of species, eco- system functioning may be affected through both direct and more indirect pathways. In freshwater systems, changes in species interaction strength and direction are often realized as trophic cascades, where lower tro- phic levels are affected by changes at higher levels (e.g., Carpenter et al. 1985, Hansson 1992, Carpenter and Kitchell 1993, Bro ̈nmark et al. 1997). Modifica- tions of energy and material fluxes induced by exotic species and reduced biodiversity may also result in a loss of ecosystem services of great economic value (Costanza et al. 1997).Here, we study the effects of an introduced inver- tebrate herbivore, the golden apple snail (Pomacea can-aliculata Lamarck; Gastropoda: Ampullariidae, see Plate 1) on aquatic plants and ecosystem processes in tropical wetlands. Aquatic plants are central to all as- pects of wetland functioning from maintaining biodi- versity to ensuring sustained productivity and natural water purification. Herbivore–induced changes in plant biomass and plant community structure may therefore fundamentally alter wetland ecosystem functioning. In Southeast Asia, these changes could have dramatic ef- fects on the use of wetlands as ‘‘biological supermar- kets’’ where plants, fish, crustaceans, and insects are harvested as food and animal fodder, water is used for human consumption, and wastewater is biofiltered (Tri- pathi et al. 1991, Furukawa and Fujita 1993, Azimi et al. 2000). The aggressive invasion of the herbivorous golden apple snail quickly drew the attention of sci- entists and government agencies when the snail became a serious pest on rice (Anderson 1993, Halwart 1994, Naylor 1996, Yusa and Wada 1999). This aquatic snail was initially introduced to Taiwan from South America in 1980 for aquaculture, for local food consumption as well as for export (Naylor 1996 and references therein). Within five years it became abundant in Japan, south- east China, and in the Philippines, and in 2002 it had established strong populations in most Southeast Asian countries (Fig. 1). The snail has also been found in Hawaii (Lach and Cowie 1999) and the southern United States (Neck and Schultz 1992, Thompson 1997). Re- cent reports indicate that the snail is now invading Australia (available online)2 and is expected to reach Bangladesh and India in the near future (Baker 1998). In contrast to most other freshwater snails, P. can- aliculata is macrophytophagous, preferring submerged or floating freshwater macrophytes (Estebenet 1995, Estebenet and Martin 2002), and thereby constitutes a major threat to rice farming. A preliminary small-scale experiment indicated that the snail might also have a strong, negative effect on naturally occurring wetland plants (N. O. L. Carlsson and J. Lacoursie`re, unpub- lished data), suggesting serious implications for bio- diversity and the functioning of natural wetland eco- systems.To determine the effect of P. canaliculata on eco- system functioning we surveyed natural wetlands with varying densities of snails. We also performed a com- plementary field experiment, testing the effects of in- creasing densities of P. canaliculata on macrophytes and phytoplankton, to unravel the mechanisms behind the patterns observed in natural wetlands.

xmethods
The golden apple snail can reach a wet mass of 120 g and 80 mm in shell height (N. O. L. Carlsson, un- published data), corresponding to the size of a medium- sized apple. Females can spawn on average 1.4 times a week (Albrecht et al. 1996), and the egg masses are deposited above the waterline (Estebenet and Martin 2002). We surveyed 14 wetlands (average wetland area: 283   133 m2; mean   SD) all situated within the Klong Chonprathan catchment, close to the city of Hua Hin, Thailand (12 34  N; 99 58  E), assessing snail density, aquatic plant communities, phytoplankton biomass, and water chemistry. In each wetland water samples were collected with a tube sampler (1.00   0.18 m) in the middle of the wetland and, from a pooled sample of 2.5 L, two subsamples of 0.1 L were taken for measurement of total phosphorus (TP) and total nitrogen (TN). Total phosphorus was analyzed as soluble re- active phosphorus after digestion with potassium per- sulphate. Total nitrogen was analyzed as nitrite after digestion with potassium persulphate and sodium hy- droxide and after nitrate reduction by a copper-cad- mium reductor column. All analyses were performed on a Technicon autoanalyzer II (Technicon, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada) according to Technicon pro- tocols (SS-EN 1189 and SS-EN 11905-1). From the same, pooled sample, 0.5 L was filtered (Whatman GF/ C) for chlorophyll a analysis as an estimate of phy- toplankton biomass. The samples were frozen for later extraction in 96% ethanol, and spectrophotometric analysis (665 nm; Jespersen and Christoffersen 1987). Wetland shape was approximated to a rectangle and total area was estimated by measuring the length of the longest and shortest sides. The wetland was then di- vided into 2   2 m squares and the percentage aquatic plant cover in each square was estimated. Maximum depth was measured to the nearest centimeter. Abun- dances and biomasses of snails and macrophytes were assessed by random quadrat sampling (1-m2 frame, n   10 in each wetland). We retrieved all plants and snails from quadrats with a hand net (2-mm mesh size). Plant species that covered at least 10% of the total surface area were identified to genus or, when possible, to species and only these were used in estimates of plant species richness.One of the wetlands (area 340 m2, mean depth 0.7 m) with a low density of the golden apple snail and high coverage of aquatic plants was used in an enclo- sure experiment. Twenty-four wooden framed enclo- sures (1   1   1 m) with walls of transparent plastic (1 mm) were placed in six blocks of four enclosures at a water depth of 0.6 m. The enclosures were pushed 0.2 m down into the sediment and then swept with a hand net to remove fish and snails. In addition, we placed fish traps in each corner of the enclosure to ensure that enclosures were free of fish. Eichhornia crassipes was a dominant macrophyte in wetlands and constituted about 75% of the total plant coverage in the experimental wetland. Other plant species were Ip- omoea aquatica, Lemna minor, Pistia sp., Salvinia sp., Ludwigia sp., and Typha sp. The edibility of all plants was tested in a laboratory experiment. All species but Typha sp. were readily eaten by P. canaliculata (N. O. L. Carlsson, unpublished data) and, thus, edible plants refer to all species except Typha sp. Due to its domi- nance, E. crassipes, a free-floating macrophyte, was selected as the experimental plant and was introduced to all enclosures at a wet mass of 420   7 g (mean   SD), corresponding to natural biomass in the wetlands. P. canaliculata snails of medium size (25–35 mm shell height) were collected in a nearby wetland and added to enclosures at a density of 0, 2, 4, or 6 snails, re- spectively, with six replicates for each density. When all snails were introduced we covered the enclosures with nets (mesh size 10 mm) to avoid bird predation and snail escape. The enclosures were sampled initially and after 3, 6, 10, 15, 23, and 27 days. We measured plant biomass by lifting plants out with a hand net, weighing them, and returning them to cages. Chloro- phyll a concentration and final snail densities were de- termined as in the field survey.

xresults


xdiscussion
In our survey, neither wetland area nor depth were correlated to snail abundance, macrophyte species rich- ness and cover, or phytoplankton and nutrient concen- trations (P   0.2 in all cases). However, the species richness and coverage of aquatic plants were negatively correlated to the density of P. canaliculata. Macro- phyte cover decreased when snail density exceeded two snails per square meter (r    0.68, P   0.010; Fig. 2) and species richness of edible plants was negatively correlated with snail density (r    0.50, P   0.050; Fig. 2). This analysis includes all size classes of snails, even though snails with a shell height  15 mm gen- erally do not feed on macrophytes (Halwart 1994). If the analysis is based only on snails  15 mm, the re- lationship between snail density and macrophyte spe- cies number is considerably stronger (r    0.77, P   0.002).The concentrations of the generally growth-limiting nutrients phosphorus and nitrogen increased with the density of P. canaliculata (r   0.79, P   0.001 and r   0.74, P   0.001, respectively). A positive correlation between snail density and phytoplankton biomass (r   0.59, P   0.010; Fig. 2) is consistent with algal blooms observed in wetlands with high snail density. At snail densities above 10 individuals/m2 algal chlorophyll concentration generally exceeded 100  g/L, phospho- rus concentrations reached 200–1000  g/L, and nitro- gen concentrations exceeded 1000  g/L. At the highest snail densities, wetlands were almost devoid of mac- rophytes (Fig. 2). Thus, the results from the wetland survey suggest that increasing densities of the snail P. canaliculata strongly modify the flux of nutrients and shift the primary production from macrophytes to phy- toplankton.The causal relationship between snail grazing, and macrophyte and phytoplankton biomass was tested in the field experiment where we found that grazing by P. canaliculata in experimental enclosures had a neg- ative impact on biomass of E. crassipes (repeated-mea- sures ANOVA, F3,6   59.296, P   0.001; Fig. 3). A contrast analysis showed that there was no further ef- fect of snail densities higher than two individuals/m2 (P   0.001; Fisher’s protected least significant differ- ence [PLSD]), suggesting that snails have strong effects on plant biomass already at very low densities (Fig. 3). The decrease in macrophyte biomass in treatments with snails was followed by severe algal blooms, so that snails had a positive effect on phytoplankton bio- mass (repeated-measures ANOVA, F3,6   6.011, P   0.001; Fig. 3). The highest snail treatment had higher phytoplankton biomass than the other treatments (P   0.001, Fisher’s PLSD).The average feeding rate of snails on E. crassipes during the experimental period was 1.01 g·snail 1·d 1 (wet mass), corresponding to a dry mass of 0.093 g·snail 1·d 1 (9.2% of wet mass; N. O. L. Carlsson, unpublished data). Since the phosphorus content of E. crassipes is 0.57% of the dry mass (Aoyoma and Nish- izaka 1993), the predicted amount of phosphorus re- leased to the enclosure (approximate volume, 400 L) at the end of the experiment (28 days) should be 37.1  g·L 1·snail 1. Over the experimental period the phos- phorus concentration increased, by this estimate, by 74.2, 148.4, and 222.6  g/L in the treatments with 2, 4, and 6 snails, respectively. As we know the initial total phosphorus concentration (48  g/L), we can cal- culate the predicted increase in chlorophyll a due to phosphorus excretion by snails from a log-linear re- lationship between total phosphorus and chlorophyll a ([log (chl)   1.583(log phosphorus)   1.134]; Dillon and Rigler 1974). Predicted chlorophyll concentrations were 148, 313, and 520  g/L in treatments with 2, 4, and 6 snails, respectively. Our final chlorophyll con- centrations were somewhat lower, reaching 125, 153, and 287  g/L (Fig. 3), corresponding to 84%, 49%, and 55% of the predicted values. This discrepancy might be accounted for by phosphorus uptake by the snails or sequestering of released phosphorus in the sediment and in periphytic algae. However, this cal- culation demonstrates that phosphorus released through snail grazing on macrophytes is sufficient to cause the recorded increase in phytoplankton biomass.The invasion of the golden apple snail results in an almost complete collapse of the aquatic plant com- munity, leading to a shift from a plant-dominated, clear- water state, to a turbid, algae-dominated state (Scheffer et al. 1993). Recently, shifts in alternative stable states have been shown to be a common phenomenon in both aquatic and terrestrial systems (Carpenter 2000, Schef- fer et al. 2001). In aquatic systems, shifts in alternative stable states have previously been shown to be medi- ated by high nutrient loads or high cyprinid fish abun- dances (Hansson et al. 1998, Scheffer 1998). Moreover, Lodge et al. (1998) suggested that macrophyte herbiv- ory may tip aquatic systems from a clear to a turbid state. Despite several studies showing that herbivores, such as birds (van Donk 1998), fish (Hansson et al. 1987), and crayfish (Lodge et al. 1998) feed on aquatic macrophytes, such herbivores have not been shown to induce shifts in states in freshwater systems. Our study, however, demonstrates how feeding by an invertebrate herbivore can mediate a shift from clear water and mac- rophyte dominance to turbid water and phytoplankton dominance by making biologically fixed nutrients from macrophyte plants available for planktonic algae.In its native South America the golden apple snail occurs at very low densities compared to invaded areas in Asia (Halwart 1994). This may be due to high pre- dation pressure since snails from this family are re- garded as key prey organisms in their native habitat (Donnay and Beissinger 1993). In Southeast Asia, ef- ficient native predators on the golden apple snail are   rare (Ichinose et al. 2002 and references herein) sug- gesting that lack of predation is an important mecha- nism in promoting the snail populations. Similar pat- terns have recently been shown for the snail Littoraria irrorata native to salt marshes in e.g., the eastern Unit- ed States. When left without predators, the Littoraria snails completely eroded stands of the salt marsh plant Spartina, suggesting that snail grazing in marine salt marshes is predator controlled (Silliman and Bertness 2002).Aquatic plants in freshwater systems provide sub- strate, refuge from predation, and a source of food for other aquatic organisms (Bro ̈nmark and Vermaat 1998, Diehl and Kornijo ́w 1998, Lodge et al. 1998). Plants also affect nutrient fluxes by luxury consumption and storage of nutrients and by being a substrate for de- nitrifying microorganisms. Reduced biodiversity and biomass of aquatic plants have been shown to affect nutrient retention capacity of wetlands considerably (Engelhardt and Ritchie 2001). Thus, macrophyte graz- ing by the golden apple snail not only alters the func- tion of wetland ecosystems; it also drastically reduces the value of ecosystem services provided by the wetland.