xabstract
On the west coast of British Columbia, Canada, the varnish clam, Nuttallia obscurata, is a rapidly spreading invasive species that can reach high densities (i.e. 800 individuals m−2). A field survey (Tier I) and an in situ mesocosm density manipulation experiment (Tier II) were applied to determine the potential effects of this invasive bivalve on select sediment attributes within the intertidal zone. In situ experiments involved seeding 1 m2 mesocosms with varnish clams at four densities; 0 (control), 200 (low), 500 (mid) and 800 (high). Sediment samples were taken 7 times over a three week period and analyzed for organic matter, ammonium and grain size (gravel, coarse silt, fine silt and silt) at three different depths, 0–3 cm (surface), 3–6 cm (intermediate) and 6–9 cm (bottom). Field surveys demonstrated that at natural densities bivalve distribution was best explained by sediment grain size. Contrary to expectations, the in situ manipulations indicated that at high densities varnish clams did not significantly increase sediment organic matter concen- trations. Their ability to deposit feed and re-ingest biodeposits may have prevented accumulations. High den- sities of varnish clams did however result in significantly higher concentrations of sediment ammonium and percent silt, but mostly within the lower sections of the sediment core. Reworking of the surficial sediments due to intense storm activity likely obscured any differences in determined sediment attributes among the 4 treatments. Nitrogen is a limiting nutrient with ammonium preferentially used by phytoplankton and microphytobenthos. These primary producers form the basis of all marine food webs thus increases in amounts of ammonium to shallow coastal seas as a result of high densities of an invasive bivalve within in- tertidal zones could result in an increased risk of eutrophication within these sensitive regions.

xintroduction

Historically, the dispersal of aquatic species was facilitated by natural means such as ocean currents and distribution was limited by natural barriers such as temperature and salinity (Raaymakers, 2002). These distribution regimes have been disrupted by human activities with as of yet unknown consequences. The shipping and aquaculture industries have been identified as the two major human- mediated vectors by which exotic aquatic species are being transported into North America (Naylor et al., 2001; Ruiz et al., 2000; Wonham and Carlton, 2005). Of particular concern is the movement of larvae via ballast water as they are often deposited into novel habitats free of natural predators (Lafferty and Kuris, 1996; Raaymakers, 2002). However, with expanding commerce, increasing transport speeds and modified recipient ports susceptible to invasion, the rate of exotic aquatic species establishment is increasing (Bax et al., 2003; Byers, 2002a; Raaymakers, 2002; Ruiz et al., 2000).An introduced species can either naturalized or become invasive (Bax et al., 2003). High densities reached by invasive aquatic species can lead to them dominating the native biota resulting in major and irreversible changes to affected ecosystems (Bax et al., 2003; Carlton, 1996; Raaymakers, 2002; Wallentinus and Nyberg, 2007; Williams and Grosholz, 2008). In particular, filter feeders and ecosys- tem engineers have been identified as two functional groups that strongly impact biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (Grosholz and Ruiz, 2009; Williams and Grosholz, 2008). The filter feeding activities of bivalves can clear the overlying water column of phyto- plankton and inorganic particles thus reducing turbidity. The increase in the depth of light penetration can have important consequences for vegetation as well as the microphytobenthos community (Newell, 2004; Newell et al., 2002; Strayer et al., 1999).A recent introduction to the Northeast Pacific is the bivalve Nuttallia obscurata (Reeve, 1857) (Gillespie et al., 1999, 2001). Native to Japan, Korea and China, the varnish clam was first reported in the Northeast Pacific in the early 1990s and it is believed to have been deposited with ballast water into Vancouver Harbour, British Columbia (BC), Canada (Dudas, 2005; Gillespie et al., 1999). From this point of origin, the varnish clam has spread rapidly at high densi- ties (i.e. up to 800 individuals m− 2) and now has a distribution rang- ing from Raft Cover, BC in the north, to Coos Bay, Oregon, USA to the south (Dudas and Dower, 2006; per comm, G. Gillespie, Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada). Varnish clams are generally found in sand and gravel substrates with the highest densities found in the high intertidal, apparently due to their inability to escape from pred- ators in the lower intertidal zone (Byers, 2002b; Dudas, 2005; Gillespie et al., 1999). Peak densities have also been found in areas associated with freshwater runoff (Gillespie et al., 1999). Varnish clams are generally found at a depth of 8–10 cm but are capable of burying up to 25 cm (Byers, 2002b). As well as suspension feeding, they are also capable of deposit feeding using locomotor and pedal sweep feeding (Gillespie et al., 1999).Previous studies have shown significant accumulations of organic matter in areas with high bivalve densities due to the excretion of biodeposits (e.g. Bartoli et al., 2001; Hasanudin et al., 2004; Nizzoli et al., 2007) which in turn alter the cycles of other nutrients such as nitrogen. Hence, high densities of varnish have the potential to influ- ence sediment chemistry and nutrient fluxes which in turn will have strong indirect impacts on co-occurring species and the ecosystems that they have invaded (Dudas, 2005). Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine the role of varnish clam density on key sediment attributes within intertidal sediment. We hypothesized that accumulations of organic matter and high NH4+ concentrations due to the breakdown of biodeposits and direct excretion would be dependent on clam density. Sediment grain size distribution is also an important determinant of bivalve presence and absence and directly affects the ecology, chemical and physical characteristics intertidal regions (Grillo et al., 1998; Mannino and Montagna, 1997). Hence we included grains size as an additional sediment attri- bute that could be altered by high densities of an invasive species.A two-tiered approach was applied to assess the potential effects of the varnish clam on biogeochemical cycling in the intertidal. A field survey was used to examine the relationship between bivalve densities and sediment geochemistry as well as to establish back- ground reference data (Tier I). A density manipulation experiment was conducted in situ to examine the potential influence of varying varnish clam densities on sediment characteristics (Tier II). It is hoped that the outcomes of this research will help inform future management decisions in regards to this invasive species.

xmethods
2.1. Study siteField research was conducted at Fillongley Provincial Park on Denman Island, BC (49°31′59′′N, 124°49′0′′W) during the summer months when tides were lowest (Fig. 1). Fillongley Park is located on Lambert Channel and there are no direct inputs of nutrients within this region. Populations of Manila clams and the native Pacific little- neck dominate this site (Gillespie et al., 2001). Varnish clams as well as several other bivalve species are also known to be present (Cook, 2008).2.2. Field surveyThe field survey design was based on Gillespie et al. (2001). A 800 m reference line parallel to the tide line was established. From this reference line, five transects were randomly established perpen- dicular to the shoreline. Subsequently, three tidal heights were randomly selected from each transect and a 0.5 × 1.0 m quadrat was established at each location resulting in a total of 15 quadrats. Tidal heights were determined using a tide calendar and sampling dates were determined by accessibility of sites. Each quadrat was sampled once.A PVC pipe (5 cm diameter) was used to take triplicate cores to a depth of at least 10 cm from each quadrat. Each core was spliced every 3 cm down the length of the core to create a sediment depth profile. Splices were placed into small plastic bags, homogenizedFig. 1. Location of the study area (enclosed by circle); location of study site indicated by a star on the east side of Denman Island, British Columbia, Canada.and subsequently frozen until analyses could be performed. Sediments within quadrats were sieved using a 6 mm sieve down to a depth of approximately 20 cm. A 6 mm sieve was used as Whiteley (2005) found that a 6 mm sieve was more efficient than a 1 mm sieve in terms of information gain per unit sampling effort and time. All bivalves (>25 mm) were counted and identified down to species whenever possible using field guides. Density values (individuals m−2) were obtained by doubling species count data to scale quadrat area (0.5 m2) to 1.0 m2.2.3. Density manipulation experimentsExclusion cages were constructed from 1.0 × 1.0 × 0.3 m PVC pipe frames and plastic mesh (3 mm), which enclosed an area of 1.0 m2. Plastic mesh covered all four sides as well as the bottom of the cages. Cages were set-up between 1.7 and 1.3 m above the tidal datum and were driven down 0.2 m into the sediment, leaving 0.1 m exposed to the tides. Additional cage design and set-up details are as described by Bendell et al. (2010). In the summer of 2009, cages were emptied and all sediments within cages were sieved (6 mm) to remove all macrofauna before being returned to the cages. Experi- mental manipulations consisted of three varnish clam density treat- ments: low (200 clams m− 2), medium (500 clams m− 2) and high (800 clams m−2). Control cages were not seeded with varnish clams. Varnish clams, which were harvested two days prior to exper- imentation, were purchased from Fanny Bay Oysters (Fanny Bay, BC). Density treatments and controls were replicated three times, resulting in a total of 12 cages. Treatments and controls were ran- domly assigned to cages. After seeding with bivalves, cages were allowed to settle for 16 days prior to sampling for sediment cores (one per mesocosm for 3 per treatment) taken 7 times (at days 1, 4, 6, 9, 15, 19, and 22) over a three week period using the same method- ology as the field survey (Tier I). A major storm occurred halfway through the 21 day sampling period. Mesocosms were emptied at the end of experimentation to determine final densities of varnish clams.2.4. Sediment analysesAll sediment samples were defrosted overnight in a fridge (~ 4 °C). Sediments were homogenized by thoroughly shaking sediments in their plastic bags before subsamples were taken and wet weighed, Organic matter concentration was determined by loss on ignition (Schumacher, 2002). Approximately 1 g of wet sediment was dried for at least 48 h. Dried samples were sieved (2 mm) to remove large particles, ashed at 400 °C for an hour and cooled to room temperature in a glass desiccator before being weighed. Organic matter content was determined from the difference in weight be- tween dried and ashed samples. Ammonium concentration was determined using the indophenol blue method as described by Keeney and Nelson (1982). Approxi- mately 1 g of wet sediment was mixed with 2 M of potassium chloride and shaken on a mechanical shaker for an hour. After sedi- ments had settled, the supernatant was filtered through Whatman no.42 filter paper and stored in a fridge (~4 °C) until analysis could be performed. 0.5 mL of the supernatant was combined with EDTA, phenol-nitroprusside and buffer solutions, and finally diluted with double de-ionized water (ddH2O) for a total volume of 2.5 mL. Sam- ples were placed in a water bath (40 °C) for 30 min, cooled to room temperature and read on a spectrophotometer at 636 nm. Ammoni- um concentrations of samples were determined from a calibration curve created from a set of known standards. Wet sieving was used to determine grain size distribution. Approximately 10 g of wet sediment was dried for at least 72 h. Sed- iments were separated into three size factions: gravel (>2 mm), coarse sand (> 0.25 mm) and fine sand (> 0.063 mm). The sieves were stacked together and the sediment sample was washed through the sieves three times using distilled water. Each fraction was then dried for at least 48 h before being weighed. The silt fraction was determined by the difference in weights between the dried sample and the dried fractions.2.8. Statistical analysesStatistical analyses were performed by JMP7 (licensed to Simon Fraser University), SigmaPlot12 or Statistical Analysis Software (SAS). Significance was set at 0.05 or when Bonferroni corrected for the number of comparisons at 0.01 (i.e., for grain size fractions). All data had obvious outliers removed (3 ∗ the standard deviation) (Osborne and Overbay, 2004) and were all tested for normality prior to analysis. A common logarithmic or arcsine (for % grain size, Ahrens et al., 1990) was performed on data that failed normality. If assumptions of normality were still not met, then data were analyzed with non-parametric methods (e.g., grain size).2.9. Field surveyAs many of the quadrats were in rocky areas, most cores were only approximately 10 cm in depth. Consequently, Tier I cores were split into two depths: surficial (0–3 cm) and intermediate (3–9 cm). All quadrats sampled were included in all statistical analyses performed. A Pearson's product–moment correlation analysis was first performed using SAS to assess bivariate relation- ships among bivalve densities, organic matter and NH4+ concentra- tions and grain size fractions. Tidal height was not included as a variable as it is highly correlated with grain size distribution and is not considered a sediment attribute (Byers, 2002b; Dame, 2011). Subsequently, these sediment characteristics were used in a maxi- mum r-square improvement procedure to determine the variable(s) that best explained bivalve density at each depth. A maximum r-square procedure is a modified forward step-wise regression, which switches an included variable with an excluded variable until r-square is maximized. The switches continue until r-square is maximized for all possible models (SAS Institute Inc., 2008).2.10. Density manipulation experimentsPreliminary profile plots were created in JMP7 to determine if sediment variables co-varied with time. Parallel lines indicated no dependence and each time of sampling was preceded by at least one tidal event which separated each sampling period. Hence, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA or Kruskal Wallis if on ranked data) for each depth (0–3, 3–6 and 6–9 cm) with samples pooled across the 7 sampling sessions (where n = 21; each mesocosm was sampled in triplicate on 7 separate sampling events; days 1, 4, 6, 9, 15, 19, and 22) was performed (Sigmaplot12) to determine if there were significant differences in sediment attributes due to density treatments. If treatment was found to have a significant effect, a mul- tiple comparison procedure (Holm–Sidak) was performed (Table 1).

xresults
3.1. Field surveyManila and Pacific littleneck clams were the dominant bivalves identified within the intertidal region that was surveyed. Distribution was patchy with bivalves found only in nine of the 15 quadrats (4–462 individuals m−2). Correlations among sediment parame- ters and the best fit linear relations between bivalve density and sediment parameters are provided in Tables 2a and 2b (surficial, 0–3) and Tables 3a and 3b (intermediate 3–9). At the surficial depth, % silt correlated with bivalve density (p = 0.05) with per- centages of fine sand and silt being the best predictors of bivalve distribution (Table 2b). At intermediate depth, organic matter and grain size (gravel, coarse sand and silt) were the best predic- tors of density (Table 3b).3.2. Density manipulation experimentsInitial mesocosm seedings were 0, 200, 500 and 800 for a 1:2.5:4 ratio. At the end of the three week experiments, mortalities were ap- proximately 30% across all density treatments. Final average densities for each treatment were 144, 360 and 583 for a 1:2.5:4 ratio (Table 1).There were no significant effects of varnish clam densities on or- ganic matter concentrations at any of the three depths: surficial (Fig. 2, p = 0.41, F = 0.97), intermediate (p = 0.34, F = 3.38) and bottom (p = 0.34, F = 3.38). Treatment had a significant effect of the concentration of NH4+ at the intermediate depth (Fig. 3 p b 0.001, F = 6.63). Concentrations of NH4+ were significantly higher in the high density treatments than the control (p b 0.001, F = 4.46) (Fig. 3). Concentrations of NH4+ were significantly different across treatments at the bottom depths as well (p b 0.001, F = 9.38). High density treatments had significantly higher concentrations of NH4+ than the control (p b 0.001, F = 4.52), low density (p b 0.001, F = 4.33) and medium density treatments (p b 0.001, F = 4.14). There was no significant effect of treatment on NH4+ concentrations in the surficial sections (p = 0.96, F = 0.28).Percent gravel tended to be less (p = 0.026, F = 3.2) and fine silt and silt was significantly greater in high density treatments when compared to the control (p b 0.01, F = 4.43 and 5.8) within the bot- tom sediments (Table 4). Coarse sand was also lower in surficial sed- iments of the high density treatments as compared to the control (p = 0.01, F = 3.6, Table 4). No differences for any fractions were detected at intermediate depths.


xdiscussion
Ecosystem engineers are defined as organisms that can control re- source availability to other organisms by changing the physical state of biotic and abiotic materials (Jones et al., 1994). Under this defini- tion, benthic bivalve species are considered ecosystem engineers as their bioturbation activities increase the depth of sediment oxidation, stimulate microflora activities and accelerate decomposition rates (Jones et al., 1994). In addition to bioturbation, the excretion of ni- trogenous wastes and biodeposits by bivalves can also alter the rates and processes of nutrient regeneration in coastal sediments (Hasanudin et al., 2004; Nakamura and Kerciku, 2000; Newell, 2004; Wallentinus and Nyberg, 2007). The limitation of nutrients is common in all ecosystems and is potentially compensated for by in- ternal recycling (Dame, 2011). Thus, any changes to the processes of nutrient regeneration can have impacts at the ecosystem level.Field surveys indicated that bivalve densities ranged between 0 and 464 individuals m− 2 with an average of 118 individuals m− 2. These values are an order of magnitude lower than those reported for intensely farmed regions where high bivalve densities have in- creased sediment nutrient concentrations (e.g. Bartoli et al., 2001). At the naturally low densities observed in our study bivalves had little influence on sediment composition and in agreement with a number of previous studies (e.g. Byers, 2002b; Grillo et al., 1998; Mannino and Montagna, 1997; Nanami et al., 2005; Schlacher and Wooldridge, 1995), their distribution was best explained by grain size.However, in contrast to previous studies that have shown that high densities of bivalves result in the accumulation of organic matterdue to the excretion of biodeposits (e.g. Bartoli et al., 2001; Hasanudin et al., 2004; Nizzoli et al., 2007), we found no statistically significant differences in organic matter concentration in the high density treatments. Varnish clams are not obligatory suspension- feeders (unlike Manila clams) and are also capable of deposit feeding via locomotor and pedal sweep feeding (Gillespie et al., 1999). Any biodeposits may have been re-ingested thus preventing accumula- tions. Ammonium, however, is a waste by-product and would not be recycled by the varnish clam. Similar to our findings, where shell- fish are farmed at high densities, high concentrations of NH4+ are also reported (e.g. Christensen et al., 2003; Nizzoli et al., 2005, 2006a, 2006b). Greatest recovery of ammonium in the current study was found in the 3–6 cm layer of sediment the preferred burrowing depth of the bivalve. Recovered concentrations of ammonium were higher than those reported for other tidal flats, and comparable to previous studies conducted within the same study area (Table 5).Nitrogen is a limiting nutrient in marine ecosystems, thus, its cycling is a key process that regulates biological productivity (Falkowski et al., 1998; Feuillet-Girard et al., 1997; Kristensen, 1988; Laverock et al., 2011). The nitrogen cycle has been fully reviewed by Herbert (1999) and schematics by Newell et al. (2002) and more recently by Canfield et al. (2010) who discuss the nitrogen cycle on a global scale. Ammonium (NH4+) in conjunction with nitrate (NO3−) make up the major components of the dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) in seawater, however, phytoplankton and micro- phytobenthos, preferentially use NH4+ (Feuillet-Girard et al., 1997; Pietros and Rice, 2003). In the oxic layer, organic nitrogen in the biodeposits undergoes ammonification, releasing NH4+ . Greater amounts of extractable sediment ammonium as a consequence of high bivalve density as observed in the current study could stimulate increased in primary production within the adjacent coastal waters. Canfield et al. (2010) conclude that the development of new agricul- tural practices to satisfy a growing global demand for food has drastically disrupted the nitrogen cycle resulting in the extensive eutrophication of fresh waters and coastal zones and resulting in dead zones (e.g., Galloway, 2008). Additional sources of nitrogen that could contribute to an already nitrogen stressed system could include ammonium from high densities of invasive bivalves. The intertidal region is highly dynamic ecosystem which experi- ences daily tidal rhythms, storm and surge events. For example, storm events have been reported to rework up to 20 cm of sediment thus being an important mechanism which can re-sort the sediment, leaving coarser particles, and resulting in the release of sediment- sequestered materials (Dolphin et al., 1995). More recently Zetsche et al. (2011) reported that a powerful storm event which occurred during their experiment with associated wind-generated waves resulted in a reworking of the sediment which resuspended material and reduced sediment compaction. This highly dynamic nature of the intertidal need be considered in the interpretation of our findings.High densities of varnish clams increased amounts of extractable ammonium and changed the particle composition by increasing amounts of fine sand and silt. By doing so, these invasive bivalves acted as ecosystem engineers altering key attributes of the intertidal sediments. High numbers of the clams however, did not increase or- ganic matter, rather, as the varnish clam is capable of both suspension and deposit feeding, any nutrient rich organic matter was likely re-ingested. As this material is reworked by the bivalve, it is probable that it becomes of lower quality and contributes to the increased amounts of silt observed in the high density treatments. These changes in intertidal sediment composition were mostly observed in the deeper portion of the sediment (6–9 cm), as sediment re-working due to tidal and storm activity likely obscured any changes which may have occurred within the surficial sediments.The intertidal supports a large diversity of macrofauna and flora. We have shown that the invasion of this region by the varnish clam could potentially lead to organically impoverished sediments with higher silt content as well as contributing to increased amounts of ammonium to shallow coastal seas. These changes to sediment composition could compromise the existing intertidal diversity and contribute to coastal eutrophication. Efforts to prevent this species from further spreading within coastal BC and elsewhere should be taken such that larger ecosystem impacts are avoided.  
