xabstract
Soil properties and soil–atmosphere fluxes of CO2, CH4 and N2O from four coastal wetlands were studied
throughout the year, namely, native Kandelia obovata mangrove forest vs. exotic Sonneratia apetala mangrove
forest, and native Cyperus malaccensis salt marsh vs. exotic Spartina alterniflora salt marsh. Soils of the four wetlands
were all net sources of greenhouse gases while Sonneratia forest contributed the most with a total soil–atmosphere
CO2-equivalent flux of 137.27 mg CO2 m−2 h−1, which is 69.23%, 99.75% and 44.56% higher than that
of Kandelia, Cyperus and Spartina, respectively. The high underground biomass and distinctive root structure of
Sonneratia might be responsible for its high greenhouse gas emission fromthe soil. Soils in Spartina marsh emitted
the second largest amount of total greenhouse gases but it ranked first in emitting trace greenhouse gases.
Annual average CH4 and N2O fluxes from Spartina soil were 13.77 and 1.14 μmol m−2 h−1, respectively, which
are 2.08 and 1.46 times that of Kandelia, 1.03 and 1.15 times of Sonneratia, and 1.74 and 1.02 times of Cyperus,
respectively. Spartina has longer growing season and higher productivity than native marshes which might increase
greenhouse gas emission in cold seasons. Exotic wetland soils had higher carbon stock as compared to
their respective native counterparts but their carbon stocks were offset by a larger proportion because of their
higher greenhouse gas emissions. Annual total soil–atmosphere fluxes of greenhouse gases reduced soil carbon
burial benefits by 8.1%, 9.5%, 6.4% and 7.2% for Kandelia, Sonneratia, Cyperus and Spartina, respectively, which
narrowed down the gaps in net soil carbon stock between native and exotic wetlands. The results indicated
that the invasion of exoticwetland plants might convert local coastal soils into a considerable atmospheric source
of greenhouse gases although they at the same time increase soil carbon accumulation.

xintroduction
Spartina alterniflora (smooth cordgrass, hereafter referred as Spartina),
a perennial grass native to North America, was introduced to China in
1979 to stabilize sediments in coastal areas (Qin and Zhong, 1992). In
the past few decades, this species is widely reported to have invaded
into mangrove forests (e.g., Zhang et al., 2012; Li et al., 2014) and suppressed
native saltmarshes (e.g., Tong et al., 2012, 2014) and it is now becoming
a dominant vegetation type over most of the Chinese coast
covering a latitude range of more than 19°. A further transition of coastal
wetlands from mangrove forests to saltmarshes is forecasted in Southeast
China under the combined effects of global climatic changes and anthropogenic
disturbances which increasingly fragment mangrove habitats
and create hospitable environment for salt marshes (Zhang et al., 2012;
Li et al., 2014). In spite of extensive studies documenting the spatial and
temporal dynamics of coastal landscape between native mangrove forests
and Spartina marshes (e.g., McKee et al., 2007; McKee and Rooth, 2008;
Perry and Mendelssohn, 2009), only a few have ever discussed the invasive
mechanisms of Spartina into local wetlands (e.g., Zhang et al., 2012;
Li et al., 2014), and even less is known about its ecological implications,
especially on carbon cycling in these regions.
Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are
three primary greenhouse gases exchanged between wetland soil and
the atmosphere. The soil–atmosphere fluxes of greenhouse gases CO2
and CH4 are integral components of carbon cycling. Coastal wetlands
are among the most productive and carbon rich ecosystems (Kirwan
and Megonigal, 2013), but the anoxic and reduced environments in
wetlands favor denitrification and methanogenesis in which large
quantity of trace greenhouse gases (CH4 and N2O) as well as CO2 is generated,
which renders coastal wetland soils a major source to atmospheric
greenhouse gases (e.g., Allen et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2012).
The fluxes of greenhouse gases can offset part or all of any carbon burial
benefit of coastal environments (Andrews et al., 2006; Luisetti et al.,
2011), given the strong Global Warming Potential (GWP) of trace
greenhouse gases CH4 and N2O, which is 23 and 296 times that of CO2
on a molecular basis over 100 year time scale, respectively (IPCC,
2007; Shindell et al., 2009). In Blackwater estuary of the UK, the fluxes
of CH4 and N2O reduce the carbon burial benefit of intertidal wetlands
by up to 49% (Adams et al., 2012). With global warming continuing, it
is forecasted that more carbon will be released from tropical ecosystems
including mangrove forests and salt marshes to the atmosphere in the
form of greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2013).
Cyperus malaccensis (shichito matgrass, hereafter referred as
Cyperus) is a dominant native species of salt marshes in Southeast
China. The aggressive invasion of Spartina into Cyperus communities in
Min River Estuary has greatly increased the emission of CH4 and CO2
from this region by facilitating both the production and the transport
of these gases through Spartina plants (Tong et al., 2012, 2014). However,
to the best of our knowledge, no research has ever compared the
emission of all three primary greenhouse gases simultaneously from invasive
saltmarshes with native marshes or with mangrove forests. With
the ever-growing expansion of Spartina marshes and the continuous decline
of mangrove forests in China, it is therefore urgent to evaluate the
impacts of such large-scale vegetation shifts on greenhouse gas emission
from coastal regions.
On the other hand, in order to compensate mangrove loss and restore
degraded mangrove forests, several exotic mangrove species
have been introduced to China over the past three decades, the most
widely used of which is Sonneratia apetala (hereafter referred as
Sonneratia), a fast-growing mangrove species native to Bangladesh. It
is reported that the total area of Sonneratia forests in China has reached
3800 ha accounting formore than 50% of replanted mangroves in China
(Chen et al., 2009). Mature Sonneratia trees could be as tall as 15 m,
much taller than most native mangrove species, and the dense canopy
poses great shading effects on adjacent native forests (Lu et al., 2014).
Moreover, it is reported that this exotic mangrove species is now
spreading out steadily from their original sites into native mangrove forests
(Ren et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2014). Due to its fast-growing nature,
Sonneratia trees demonstrate greater carbon accumulation potential
than many native mangrove species by sequestering larger amounts of
carbon in biomass and sediments (Liao et al., 1990; Ren et al., 2008,
2010), and for this reason, Sonneratia is favored for projects aiming at
promoting coastal carbon accumulation (Chen et al., 2009). On the
other hand, the litterfall from Sonneratia was reported to have lower
carbon to nitrogen ratio than native mangroves which speeds up carbon
cycling in these regions (Lu et al., 2014). However, there is no published
research which has ever attempted to quantify the emission of three
greenhouse gases from these replanted Sonneratia forests. Without
counting to what extent the carbon accumulation capacity is offset by
greenhouse gas fluxes, it could not be decided whether the introduction
of this species would bring significant carbon burial benefits to coastal
environments.
Kandelia obovata (hereafter referred as Kandelia) is one of the most
dominant mangrove species in Southeast China and is vastly planted
in coastal areas for mangrove restoration. In Jiulong River Estuary,
replanted Sonneratia forests and native Kandelia forests locate next to
each other. On the seaward side of the mangrove margin, naturally
occurring Cyperus marshes and Spartina marshes mosaically colonize
the intertidal areas and extend their cover toward nearest the sea. Vegetation
composition and thermal and hydrological conditions are two
key factors regulating the exchanges of greenhouse gases between wetland
soil and the atmosphere (e.g., Berglund and Berglund, 2011; Chen
et al., 2012). In Jiulong River Estuary, the four different vegetation
types, native Kandelia forest vs. alien Sonneratia forest and native
Cyperus marsh vs. invasive Spartina marsh, experience similar tidal influence
and weather conditions which gives us natural advantages to
study the influences of vegetation types on soil–atmosphere fluxes of
greenhouse gases. In this research,we simultaneously studied the fluxes
of three greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4 and N2O) and soil properties
throughout the year from the four adjacent wetlands dominated by
Kandelia forest, Sonneratia forest, Cyperus marsh and Spartina marsh, respectively.
This study is aimed to test the following two hypotheses,
(1) the invasion and introduction of exotic species into local ecosystems
will greatly promote the soil–atmosphere fluxes of greenhouse gases in
coastal regions and (2) soil carbon stock will increase with the invasion
of more productive exotic vegetations.

xmethods
2.1. Site description
The study area is located in the Jiulong River Estuary Mangrove Reserve
(117°54′E, 24°23′N) in the monsoonal subtropics of Southeast
China (Fig. 1). The climate of this region is warm and wet,with an average
annual temperature of 21 °C and average annual precipitation of
1371 mm, most of which falls between April and September. Tide pattern
in this region is typically semi-diurnal tides with an average tide
range of 2.98 m and seawater salinity of 17.12 ppt. The four vegetation
types, namely, native Kandelia forest, exotic Sonneratia forest, native
Cyperus marsh and exotic Spartina marsh are adjacent under the same
intertidal elevation and thus experience similar tidal influence (Fig. 1).
Native Kandelia forest and Cyperus marsh have long existed in this region
while exotic Sonneratia forest was introduced in 1997. The
Sonneratia forest is now mature with closed canopy and many seedlings
were found established near and under the canopy of adjacent Kandelia
forest. Spartina invaded into this intertidal area after 2000 and has replaced
part of native Cyperus marsh since then and is now expanding
its distribution aggressively toward the mangrove margin. Soils in this
region were rather muddy consisting of more than 80% silt particles
and soil water content varied within a narrow range between 42% and
52%. Soil porosity ranged from 45% to 59% with many benthic borrows
distributed on soil surface resulting from the activities of benthic
fauna. Because of seawater inundation, soils in these wetlands were anoxic
(redox potential Eh ranging from −158.5 to 11.2 mv) and slightly
acidic (pH ranging from6.13 to 6.85)with an average porewater salinity
fluctuating between 16.78 ppt in summer and 17.47 ppt in winter. The
four study sites, each representing one of the four vegetation types,
were set at least 10m apart from each other so as to avoid edge effects,
and vegetation in each site was monoculture. Each site was then divided
into three transects perpendicular to the coast with a distance about
10m away from each other. Pilot experiments were taken on December
2nd, 2012 in each transect for every vegetation type to test the homogeneity
of soil properties from seawards to landwards. Eight soil cores
with the depth and diameter of 10 cm were collected at intervals of
1.5 to 2.0 m from seawards to landwards within each transect, and the
results indicated that soil properties including soil texture, salinity, porosity,
pH, Eh, nutrient contents (total carbon content, total nitrogen
content and total phosphorus content), temperature and water content
were homogenous with no significant differences detected across intertidal
area or along coastal line within each site.
Stand structure of Kandelia forest and Sonneratia forest were studied
by randomly setting three 5m× 5m quadrats within each site. Density
(individualsm−2), diameter at breast height (DBH, cm) and tree height
(m) of every individual tree within each quadrat were recorded
(Table 1). As to the community structure of Cyperus and Spartina
marshes, three 0.5 m × 0.5 m permanent quadrats were set randomly
within each site by marking the quadrat boundary with thin red cloth.
The height (m) of 10 randomly selected shoots and the total number
of stems within each quadrat were measured and recorded in January
15 (winter), April 13 (spring), July 11 (summer) and October 8 (autumn),
respectively (Table 1).
2.2. Gas sampling and flux measurement
Gas samplings were carried out on the fourth day after the largest
spring tide in January, April, July and October of 2013, respectively,
each of which corresponds to local climate of winter, spring, summer
and autumn. Gas samples were collected simultaneously from the four
sites following the enclosed chamber technique described by Chen
et al. (2010) and all samplings were done 2 h before the lowest ebb
tide (Chen et al., 2010). To minimize the disturbance by human activity
while sampling, a wooden plank was deployed within each site one day
before sampling. A total of three vented static chambers were deployed
within each site with one in each transect. The static chambers were
made of clear Perspex with a sharpened base to aid insertion into coastal
sediments. The chambers were cylindrical with a bottom radius of 5 cm
and a height of 17 cm. A metal vent tube with a diameter of 1 mm was
fitted on the side surface of the cylinder (about 8 cm above the ground)
to allow equalization of pressure perturbations between the chamber and
ambient atmospheres, and silicone putty was used to ensure a gas tight
seal around the vent tube. The gas sampling hole was on top of the chamber
with a diameter of 3 cm. After the chamber was inserted into the soil,
the hole was gently plugged with a rubber stopper and sealed by silicone
putty. Gas samples were collected via 10 ml glass syringe by penetrating
the rubber with the attached hypodermic needle into the chamber. In
Cyperus marsh, Spartina marsh and Kandelia forest, the soil surface covered
by chambers was free of vegetation or benthic burrows, while in
Sonneratia forest, short slim aboveground pneumatophores of mature
Sonneratia trees occupied the soil surface at a density of 235.2 ± 3.2 per
square meter. Therefore, two or three pneumatophores were covered
under each chamber in Sonneratia forest. Before sampling, the open end
of the chamber was gently inserted 2 cm into the soil, and a thermometer
was inserted next to the chamber 5 cm into the soil to record soil temperature
(Liu et al., 2006). The devices were stabilized for 30 s before sealing
the sampling hole with a rubber and silicone putty. Pilot experiments indicated
that the concentration of greenhouse gases in the static chamber
increased linearly within about the first 50 min. Therefore, 5ml gas samples
were collected from each chamber at intervals of 15 min. The gas
samples were then transported immediately to dark airtight containers
and analyzed within 12 h by a gas chromatography (GC) technique to determine
the soil–atmosphere fluxes of three greenhouse gases.
The concentration of N2O was measured by the GC system (Agilent
7890A) equipped with a 63Ni electron capture detector (ECD) and a
RT-Q Plot column, and the carrier gas was helium at a flow rate of
6.5 ml min−1. Temperatures of the injector, column and detector were
100 °C, 70 °C and 320 °C, respectively, according to the standards set
by Li et al. (2004) which were proved sensitive to low concentrations
of N2O. The concentrations of CH4 and CO2 were analyzed by the same
GC system equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and a
Poropak-Q column. Nitrogen was used as carrier gas at a flow rate of
20 mlmin−1 and the temperatures for the injector, column and detector
were 80 °C, 50 °C and 80 °C, respectively (Chen et al., 2011). The concentration
of greenhouse gases was then determined by comparing the
peak area of gas samples with that of standard curves. The relative standard
deviations of replicate standard measurements were 2.8%, 2.7%
and 2.4% for CO2, CH4 and N2O, respectively (Chen et al., 2011).
The soil–atmosphere flux (F, molm−2 h−1) of each greenhouse gas
was finalized by following the formula:
F ¼ VΔM=Aρ ð1Þ
where V (m3) is the air volume left within the closed chamber after the
open end of the chamber was inserted into the sediment; ΔM (h−1) is
the difference in gas concentration within the chamber; A (m2) is the
surface area of sediment covered by the chamber and ρ (m3 mol−1) is
the volume of gas per mol under the atmospheric pressure then.
CO2-equivalent greenhouse gas fluxes (Fe, mg CO2m−2 h−1) ofN2O
and CH4 were determined following the formula:
Fe ¼ F M  GMP ð2Þ
where F is the flux of greenhouse gas, M is the molecular weight of the
greenhouse gas andGMP represents the global warming potential of the
greenhouse gas when compared to CO2 over a 100 year time scale,
which is 296 for N2O (IPCC, 2007) and 23 for CH4 (Shindell et al.,
2009), respectively.
2.3. Soil sampling and soil property measurement
Soil sampling followed immediately after gas sampling was completed.
Two soil cores (0–10 cm) under each chamber were collected
by hand-operated soil samplers (5 cm in diameter), one for the measurement
of root biomass while the other for soil properties. Live
roots of plants were carefully washed, separated from dead ones and
dried at 60 °C until reaching constant weight. Analyses of soil properties
all followed the standard methods described by Page et al. (1982). One
third of fresh soil samples were used for measurements of water content,
NO3
−-N and NH4
+-N contents while the remaining was air dried
and sieved through a 2 mm sieve. Soil pH was determined by the soil
pH meter (Hanna HI 9025) and total organic carbon (TOC)was calculated
according to the loss on ignition at 550 °C. Contents of NO3
−-N, NH4
+-
N, total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) and total phosphorus (TP) were analyzed
by a flow injection analyzer (Futura II, Alliance Instruments).
The manuscript presented four occasions of soil–atmosphere greenhouse
gas flux measurements in four adjacent coastal ecosystems. This
study is pseudo-replicated because of the difficulty of finding three or
more comparable sites in this kind of environment.We felt it necessary
for us to remind readers to view this study critically.
2.4. Statistical analysis
All data were expressed as means±standard deviation of three replicates.
The data for each variable was tested for normality and homogeneous
variances, and logarithmic transformation of data was taken if
necessary before testing with analysis of variance (ANOVA). Soil properties
and fluxes of greenhouse gases of each season were compared
among four vegetation types using one-way ANOVA. Soil properties
and flux of each greenhouse gas was analyzed by two-way ANOVA
with vegetation type and season as fixed factors. If any difference was
significant at p b 0.05, Tukey's HSD comparisons were used to locate
where the difference lies. Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated
to indicate the relationship between soil properties and greenhouse
gas fluxes. All statistic analyses were processed by MATLAB 7.0 (The
MathWorks, Inc.).

xresults
3.1. Soil properties
Soil temperature in salt marshes was generally higher than that in
mangrove forests, but no statistic difference was detected between wetland
types in all seasons except in summer when soil temperature
showed the highest of the year (Fig. 2). Soil water content was highest
in Sonneratia forest while no differences were found among the other
three vegetation types. Similarly, root biomass in Sonneratia forest was
more than twice as high as those in other vegetations. Soil pH did not
show constant trend with vegetation or season. Soil pH differed significantly
in summer and autumn between mangrove forests and salt
marshes while no significant differences were detected in the other
two seasons.
Soil total organic carbon (TOC) content was generally higher in wetlands
occupied by exotic Sonneratia and Spartina than those dominated
by native Kandelia or Cyperus (Fig. 3). As to soil total nitrogen (TKN)
content, no significant differences were found among vegetations
while significant seasonal trends were detected with the highest value
occurring either in summer or autumn for all vegetation types
(Table 2). Soil NO3
−-N content and NH4
+-N content were both higher
in mangrove forests than marshes while they differed in the seasonal
tendency. The highest value of NO3
−-N generally occurred in autumn
and winter while the highest value of NH4
+-N showed in summer and
autumn. Similarly, the total phosphorus (TP) content was higher in
summer and autumn than the other two seasons with greater value occurring
in exotic wetlands than native ones.
3.2. Greenhouse gas fluxes
Both vegetation types and seasons had significant impacts on soil–
atmosphere flux of greenhouse gases (Table 3). When compared between
two different vegetation types of the same wetland type, the
soil of exotic forest emitted much greater amount of N2O than native
forest all year round, while the atmospheric flux of N2O from two
marsh types did not follow constant tendency (Fig. 4). Total emission
of N2O from all wetlands peaked in spring and summer. Similarly,
when it comes to atmospheric flux of CH4, soils of invasive wetlands
showed significantly higher emission than native ones. Sonneratia forest
had the highest soil–atmosphere flux of CO2, followed by Spartina
marsh, Kandelia forest and Cyperus marsh with the highest value occurring
either in spring or summer. Atmospheric flux of N2O was positively
correlated to soil temperature, water content, TOC and TP while
negatively affected by soil pH and NO3ˉ-N content (Table 4). Similarly,
soil water content, TOC, NH4
+-N and TP contents were positively related
with fluxes of CH4 and CO2.
When all greenhouse gas fluxes were converted to CO2-equivalent
value, the greatest contributor to greenhouse effects was CO2, followed
by N2O and CH4 (Table 5). When compared among vegetation types,
Sonneratia forest had the highest annual accumulative CO2-equivalent
fluxes of three gases, which is 69.2%, 99.8% and 44.6% higher than that
in Kandelia forest, Cyperus marsh and Spartina marsh, respectively. The
highest accumulative value of CO2-equivalent fluxes of three greenhouse
gases occurred in summer for Sonneratia, Cyperus, and Spartina
but in spring for Kandelia forest.

xdiscussion
Tropical and subtropical coastal wetlands, represented by mangrove
forests and salt marshes, are among the most productive ecosystems on
earth (Lunstrum and Chen, 2014). Since these ecosystems are frequently
inundated by sea water, soils of coastal wetlands are anoxic, acidic
and of high salinity which effectively slows down nutrient turnover
leading to considerable accumulation of organic matter within the ecosystems
(e.g., Sánchez-Andrés et al., 2010; Nordhaus et al., 2011). It is
estimated that 12–20% of total terrestrial carbon is stored in wetland
soils, taking into account the fact that wetlands only represent less
than 5% of the total land area of earth (IPCC, 2007). On the other hand,
the organic-matter rich and anoxic environment in coastal soils favors
various microbial processes including nitrification, denitrification and
methanogenesis,which produce and emit large quantity of trace greenhouse
gases as well as CO2 to the atmosphere (Chen et al., 2010, 2011,
2012). For these reasons, coastal wetland soils are traditionally regarded
as major contributors to atmospheric greenhouse gases (e.g., Allen et al.,
2007; Chen et al., 2012). In recent years, however, with the accelerating
of sea level rise and land use changes, uncertainties emerge around the
question of whether coastal wetland soils function as an atmospheric
source or sink of greenhouse gases. The evaluation of coastal soil's
potential to uptake or emit greenhouse gases is further complicated
by rapid vegetation shifts due to species invasion in these areas,
where 24% of the world's most invasive plants are colonizing their
new habitat and reshaping landscape formation (Zedler and Kercher,
2004).
Vegetation acts as a key control on the spatial and temporal variation
of soil–atmosphere fluxes of greenhouse gases by influencing the production,
oxidation and transport of gases from deep in the soil (Hirota
et al., 2004; Koelbener et al., 2010; Tong et al., 2012).While a large proportion
of greenhouse gases emitted from wetland soils is due to underground
microbiological processes, the growth of vegetation modifies
soil properties which strongly affects microbial activities (Chen et al.,
2012). In this study, soil properties including soil water content, temperature,
root biomass, TOC, NO3ˉ-N, NH4
+-N and TP differed significantly
with vegetation types (Figs. 2 and 3; Table 2) and accordingly, fluxes
of greenhouse gases showed significant variations among the four vegetation
types.
The soils under these four vegetations types were all a net source of
greenhouse gases throughout the year,while alien Sonneratia forest and
Spartina marsh had significantly higher greenhouse gas emission than
their respective native counterparts Kandelia and Cyperus (Fig. 4),
which supports our first hypothesis. Besides, soil organic carbon stock
was also found significantly higher in the two alien vegetations although
they were relatively young as opposed to native vegetations
which accords well with our second hypothesis.
CO2 is the main form of greenhouse gas exchanged between local
soils and the atmosphere with its annual average flux several magnitudes
higher than that of CH4 and N2O, which is in well accordance
with the results by Tong et al. (2012, 2014) in Cyperus and Spartina codominated
marshes in Min River Estuary and by Chen et al. (2010,
2011, 2012) in Kandelia-dominated mangrove forests in Hong Kong.
Since trace greenhouse gases of CH4 and N2O have higher Global
Warming Potential (GWP) than CO2, the fluxes of all three greenhouse
gases were converted to CO2-equivalent fluxes on a 100 year time scale
to compare their respective contribution to GWP of this region. On an
annual average basis, the contribution of CO2, N2O and CH4 to GWP was
74.7–-81.1%, 9.3–21.1% and 3.0–5.3%, respectively (Table 5),which differs
from some agro-ecosystems where N2O dominated the GWP contribution
(Mosier et al., 2005) but accords well with the observations in many mangrove
forests in South China (Chen et al., 2010), indicating that CO2 is the
primary contributor of local wetland soils to global warming.
Soil–atmosphere flux of CO2 ranged from 0.85 to 3.20 mmolm−2 h−1
in this area, in broad agreement with other static chamber measurements
in mangrove forests of China (0.56–20.56 mmol CO2m−2 h−1, Chen et al.,
2010) but significantly higher than that from the secondary mangrove
forests of eastern Thailand (0.027–0.052 mmol CO2 m−2 h−1,
Poungparn et al., 2009). The flux of CO2 showed significant spatial variations with
the highest annual average value occurring in Sonneratia forest
and the lowest in Cyperus marsh. It is widely accepted that the production
and emission of CO2 from wetland soils is closely controlled by plants
(e.g., Christensen et al., 2003; Tong et al., 2014). Apart from directly
adding to CO2 emission by root respiration, plants provide substrate for
heterotrophic respiration by excreting labile carbohydrates as exudates
and root debris which is related to above and underground biomass
(Jones et al., 2004). In the present study, CO2 flux was found to be positively
correlated with root biomass (r=0.733, p b 0.01) and soil TOC content
(r = 0.500, p b 0.05). Among the four vegetation types, Sonneratia
forest had the highest root biomass and TOC content although the density
of plants was the lowest, which partly explained the significantly higher
CO2 flux from Sonneratia forest than the others. Additionally, different
from salt marshes or Kandelia forest whose roots are mostly under the
soil surface, Sonneratia had distinctive pneumatophores which project
out from the soil surface with high density and spread out as far as 5 m
away from the nearest tree. These pencil-like pneumatophores connect
the underground roots directly with the atmosphere allowing rapid diffusion
of gases from e.g., CO2 and CH4 and into e.g., O2 deep soil through the
air-filled aerenchyma tissue (Purvaja et al., 2004; Purnobasuki and
Suzuki, 2005; Penha-Lopes et al., 2010). Previous studies indicate that
pneumatophores are more efficient in exchanging gases than other
forms of mangrove roots (Kreuzwieser et al., 2003) and the presence of
pneumatophores could increase the emission of greenhouse gases several
fold in some tropical mangrove wetlands (Kitaya et al., 2002; Kristensen
et al., 2008; Penha-Lopes et al., 2010). The extensive pneumatophores
in Sonneratia forest might act as an efficient pathway for CO2 to escape
from local micro-environment and reduce the consumption of CO2 by
soil bacteria (Chen et al., 2010)which collectively lead to a high CO2 emission
from Sonneratia soils.
The second largest source of greenhouse gases is the soil of Spartina
marsh which has an annual average CO2-equivalent flux 17% higher
than Kandelia soil and 38% higher than native Cyperus marsh soil
(Table 5). Similarly, higher soil–atmosphere fluxes of greenhouse
gases frominvasive Spartina marsheswas also reported inMin River Estuary
than native Phragmites australis and Cyperus marshes (Tong et al.,
2012, 2014) and in Yangtze River Estuary than native Suaeda salsa,
Scirpus mariqueter and Cyperus marshes (Chung et al., 2004; Cheng
et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2010). Tong et al. (2012) summarized two
properties of Spartina responsible for its high emission potential of
greenhouse gases. One is due to its high net primary productivity and
the other is its superior capacity of transporting O2 through its well developed
aerenchyma tissue to underground roots and rhizosphere
for aerobic respiration. In the present study, similar higher soil TOC
and TKN contents were also found in Spartina marshes than native mangrove
forests or salt marshes, which suggested the contribution of high
productivity of Spartina to greenhouse gas production.
Cyperus marsh had the lowest fluxes of annual average greenhouse
gases among the four vegetations while showing the most significant
seasonality (p b 0.001). Spartina and Cyperus are both herbaceous, but
Spartina is from the perennial grass family which has a longer growing
season than native Cyperus. It is widely recognized that the soil–atmosphere
fluxes of greenhouse gases were strongly influenced by plant
size and live aboveground biomass (e.g., Chanton et al., 1997; Greenup
et al., 2000; Kutzbach et al., 2004). Spartina is a C4 plant and has much
taller stems and more leaves than Cyperus in the study area (Table 1).
Although the fluxes of greenhouse gases were always higher in Spartina
than Cyperus marsh throughout the year, the greatest difference in
greenhouse gas emission occurred in winter when aboveground parts
of Cyperus began to wither. If more Cyperus marshes are to be replaced
by perennial Spartina, winter fluxes of greenhouse gases might increase
significantly in this region.
Trace greenhouse gases CH4 and N2O contribute about 20% and 6% to
the greenhouse effects on a global scale, respectively (IPCC, 2001). In the
present study, however, N2O flux made the second largest contribution
to GWP while CH4 was the least contributor, which agrees well with
several previous reports of negligible or negative CH4 emissions from
pristine mangrove forests (Alongi et al., 2000; Kreuzwieser et al.,
2003; Barnes et al., 2006; Allen et al., 2007) but differs from brackish
marshes in Yangtze River estuary (Cheng et al., 2007, 2010) or
Australian mangrove wetlands (Kreuzwieser et al., 2003) where CH4
flux is several orders higher than N2O. On an annual average basis,
soil–atmosphere fluxes of both trace greenhouse gases were showed
highest in the invasive Spartina marsh, and similar results were also
found inMin River Estuary where Spartina marshes far exceeded native
Cyperus (Tong et al., 2012) and Phragmites australis marshes (Cheng
et al., 2007) in trace greenhouse gas emission. However, few, if any, previous works
have ever directly compared the fluxes of greenhouse gases
between invasive marshes and mangrove forests. In this study, highly
invasive Spartina had much higher emission of both CH4 and N2O than
native Kandelia forest and even higher than exotic Sonneratia forest,
suggesting that the further shifts of coastal vegetation from mangrove
forests to invasive marshes might convert local wetland soils to a significant
atmospheric source of trace greenhouse gases.
Temperature is generally recognized as a key driver for variations of
N2O flux from wetland soil (e.g., Bauza et al., 2002; Allen et al., 2007),
and similarly, N2O flux was found most positively correlated with temperature
among all environmental factors (r = 0.617, p b 0.01) in this
study. However, an intriguing finding was that although the four vegetation
types experience similar tidal influence and weather conditions,
soil temperatures were higher in salt marshes than adjacent mangrove
forests throughout the year. Accordingly, N2O fluxes were higher from
the former than the latter. One possible explanation is that mangrove
forests are composed of mature trees with closed canopy which efficiently
cut down on the sun's radiative force reaching the soil surface
and hence lead to the differences in temperature as well as N2O flux between
vegetation types in this study.
The flux of CH4 ranged from 2.00 to 21.70 μmol m−2 h−1 in this region,
which is in broad agreement with records from other mangrove
forests (e.g., 11.9–5168.6 μmol m−2 h−1 in Hong Kong, Chen et al.,
2010; 5.73–201.88 μmol m−2 h−1 in East India, Chauhan et al., 2008)
and salt marshes (e.g., 4.8–70.5 μmol m−2 h−1 in Min River Estuary,
Tong et al., 2012; 97.5–313.75 μmol m−2 h−1 in the Inner Mongolia
marshes, Wang and Han, 2005) but generally toward the lower-end of
the observed range which indicates that soils of Jiulong River Estuary
act as a negligible source of atmospheric CH4. CH4 is produced by methanogenic
bacteria under anoxic environments (Chen et al., 2011;
Livesley and Andrusiak, 2012; Tong et al., 2012). In this study, CH4
flux was positively correlated with temperature and water content,
which explained the significant spatial-temporal variations in CH4
flux. Although CH4 flux in this area was relatively low as compared to
some other coastal soils (Wang and Han, 2005; Chauhan et al., 2008;
Chen et al., 2010; Tong et al., 2012), the value is generally higher in invasive
Sonneratia and Spartina wetlands than native ones. Vegetation
can influence CH4 emission from the soil in three ways (e.g., Van der
Nat and Middelburg, 2000). It acts as a source of methanogenic substrate
by releasing exudates and providing plant litterfall (Tong et al.,
2012). Exotic Sonneratia forest and Spartina marsh both had much
higher contents of TOC, TKN and TP than native wetlands, which could
accelerate the production of CH4 in these systems. Secondly, plants
with well-developed aerenchyma system provide a direct conduit for
CH4 to escape into the atmosphere without passing through the aerobic
layer of surface soil and hence reduce the consumption of CH4 by
methanotrophic bacteria (Biswas et al., 2007). The unique root structures
of Sonneratia forest could be described as numerous chimneys
emerging from the soil surface emitting CH4 produced by benthic microorganisms.
Similarly, Tong et al. (2012) found that although more
CH4 was oxidized in rhizospheres of Spartina than Cyperus marsh,
soil–atmosphere flux of CH4 was significantly higher in Spartina marsh
because of its higher production and more efficient transport of CH4
by Spartina than Cyperus marsh.
5. Conclusions
Spartina was introduced to China because of its high productivity
which promotes sediment accretion, and Sonneratia was favored for
mangrove restoration due to its fast-growing nature which contributes
to carbon accumulation in coastal soils (Lu et al., 2014). In this study,
high organic carbon stock is also recorded in the exotic wetlands of
Sonneratia and Spartina, but this soil carbon burial benefit is offset by
their high annual soil–atmosphere fluxes of greenhouse gases by 9.5%
and 7.2%, respectively. The soil of Sonneratia forest has the greatest
emission of total greenhouse gases and the soil of Spartina marsh is
the most efficient in promoting trace greenhouse gases,which indicated
that the large-scale invasion and introduction of alien plants might convert
local coastal soils into a significant atmospheric source of greenhouse
gases. Future projects aimed at promoting carbon accumulation
by introducing exotic plants should at first evaluate its potential of producing
greenhouse gases,which can offset part or all of any carbon burial
benefit of coastal environments.