xabstract
Invasions of exotic plant species in estuaries have occurred worldwide, and may pro- foundly affect native biodiversity and estuarine ecosystem functioning. To assess the effect of plant invasions on benthic meiofauna, we compared the nematode communities in marshes dominated, respectively, by invasive Spartina alterniflora and native Scirpus mariqueter and Phragmites australis at 3 local sites over 2 seasons in the Yangtze River estuary, PR China. S. alterniflora stands had gen- erally lower nematode trophic diversity than the stands of the 2 native plants, suggesting that the exotic plant led to a simplified benthic food web. The relative abundance of bacterial-feeding nema- todes tended to increase in S. alterniflora marshes compared to P. australis marshes. The increased bacterial-feeding nematodes in S. alterniflora stands are likely to reflect the altered decomposition processes, rates and pathways, which may, in turn, modify belowground nutrient cycling of the estu- arine ecosystems. The dissimilarity in nematode community structure between S. alterniflora and S. mariqueter marshes was smaller than that between S. alterniflora and P. australis marshes, and the dissimilarity between Spartina-invaded and native marshes was even smaller than between the 2 native plant marshes. It is suggested that the detection of the ecological consequences of plant inva- sions depends on which native plant species is considered. Site effects were generally detected in the comparison of sediment properties and nematodes among 3 plant marshes. Sediment water content, electrical conductivity, bacterial biomass and litter biomass were identified as the most important factors in the shaping of the nematode communities.

xintroduction
Estuaries are widely recognized as an important ecosystem type for a wide range of marine communi- ties, and play major roles in conserving biodiversity (Levin et al. 2001). However, they are undergoing rapid environmental changes caused by anthropo- genic activities, including eutrophication, non-nutrient pollutants, overfishing, habitat alteration, global clima- te, and species invasions (Levin et al. 1996, Jackson et al. 2001). Compared with other ecosystems, estuaries have become one of the most heavily invaded ecosys- tems in the world (Cohen & Carlton 1998, Grosholz 2002). Invasions of exotic plant species in the estuaries have occurred worldwide (Ruiz et al. 1997), and mayprofoundly affect native biodiversity and estuarine ecosystem functioning (Posey 1988, Posey et al. 1993, Talley & Levin 2001, Cheng et al. 2006).Cordgrasses (plants in the genus Spartina Schreb.) are successful invaders in coastal wetlands and have spread across the globe (Chen et al. 2004, Levin et al. 2006). S. alterniflora has caused considerable evolu- tionary and ecological consequences to global estuar- ies (Wang et al. 2006). It originated on the east and gulf coasts of the USA and spread to many coastal and estuarine regions of the world, including tidal marshes on the west coast of North America, as well as in Australia, France, The Netherlands, UK, New Zealand and China (Kriwoken & Hedge 2000, Neira et al. 2005). Many previous studies have reported that Spartina invasions influence benthic communities when compared with unvegetated mudflats (Zipperer 1996, O’Connell 2002, Neira et al. 2005), and several studies have compared benthic macrofaunal commu- nities of the invasive Spartina and those of native veg- etated marshes (Hedge & Kriwoken 2000, Chen et al. 2005, Neira et al. 2005), and yielded inconsistent results. In Little Swanport estuary, Tasmania, Hedge & Kriwoken (2000) found that species richness and total abundance of macrofauna in invasive S. anglica and native saltmarshes do not differ significantly. Chen et al. (2005) reported that the replacement of Scirpus mariqueter by S. alterniflora results in re- duced macroinvertebrate density and species di- versity in salt marshes of Chongming Island in the Yangtze River estuary, China. Neira et al. (2005) found higher macrofaunal species richness in Spartina hybrid-invaded patches relative to native Salicornia marshes in San Francisco Bay, USA, but no differ- ences in total macrofaunal density were found. These studies suggest that the responses of benthic macro- fauna to Spartina spp. invasions are quite variable, depending on the vegetation type and invaded sites (Neira et al. 2005). However, knowledge is lacking about the impacts of Spartina invasions on benthic meiofaunal communities such as nematodes.In the present study, we compared the benthic nema- tode communities of Spartina alterniflora-invaded marshes and 2 native plant marshes (Scirpus mari- queter and Phragmites australis) at 3 local sites over 2 seasons in the Yangtze River estuary, China. S. alterni- flora was intentionally introduced into the Yangtze River estuary to promote sediment accretion and growth of salt marshes in the late 1980s, as it has a num- ber of biological traits promoting that goal, including fast growth, dense rhizomal network, and great bio- mass. This species spread to most of the wetlands in the Yangtze River estuary and is now excluding native plant species by forming dense monocultures.Nematodes were selected to evaluate the effects of plant invasion in this study, because they have close relationships with vegetations (Ingham et al. 1985, Yeates 1999). In addition, they are the most abundant metazoan taxon, comprising 60 to 90% of the total fauna in estuarine sediments (Coull 1999). They play a central role in the detrital food web (Moore & de Ruiter 1991) and are assumed to function as regulators of decomposition and mineralization processes (Coleman 1985). Thus, nematode communities can provide unique insights into many aspects of ecosystem pro- cesses and have been increasingly used as bioindica- tors of ecosystem functioning (Ritz & Trudgill 1999, Wu et al. 2002). In the present study, we analyzed the den- sity, diversity, community structure, and trophic com- position of benthic nematodes, and related the varioussediment properties and vegetation characteristics to nematode communities. The specific objectives of the study were: (1) to compare the nematode communities between the invasive Spartina alterniflora and the native plant marshes and (2) to increase our limited knowledge of the effects of plant invasions on benthic nematodes in estuarine ecosystems. 

xmethods
Study sites. The study was carried out in the tidal marshes of the Yangtze River estuary, PR China. Tidal marshes from 3 sites in the estuary were chosen for study: Dongtan of Chongming Island, Jiuduansha Is- lands, and Nanhui (Fig. 1). At these sites, Scirpus mari- queter (hereafter Scirpus) and Phragmites australis (hereafter Phragmites) were the most common marsh plant species; both are C3 plants and native to the Yangtze River estuary. Scirpus occurs in middle and high marshes, and Phragmites in high marshes (Gao & Zhang 2006). Since the tidal marshes in the study area are now heavily infested with introduced C4 plant Spartina alterniflora (hereafter Spartina), the 2 native plant species are rapidly being replaced by this exotic plant. Spartina expands its range mainly by colonizing the high marsh zones, but also by extending to the middle marshes. In Dongtan marshes, small Spartina patches were first found in 1995. Spartina was intentionally intro- duced to Jiuduansha in 1997, to attract shorebirds away from flightpaths in and out of Pudong Airport. Both Dongtan and Jiuduansha are national nature reserves. Comparatively, Nanhui received more disturbance than the other 2 sites. In Nanhui marshes, Spartina was first transplanted to promote sediment accretion in the late 1980s. At each study site, 3 meadows at more-or- less similar tidal elevations were selected for sampling in the tidal marshes dominated by Spartina, Scirpus, and Phragmites, respectively. A global positioning sys- tem (GPS) was used to ensure the consistency of sam- pling location in different sampling seasons.Sampling design and environmental conditions.Samplings were carried out in March and August 2004. Sediment samples were collected using a modi- fied O’Connor split corer (3.2 cm diameter, 10 cm depth). In each meadow, 4 transects of 20 m in length parallel to the coastline were established with a ran- dom starting point. Ten sediment cores taken at 2 m intervals along each transect were bulked into a single composite sample to reduce variance associated with the aggregated spatial pattern of benthic nematodes. Thus, 4 composite samples were obtained at each meadow as 4 independent replicates. Each of the com- posite sediment samples was well homogenized by hand and then split into 4 parts: 150 g of sediment were fixed in 4% formalin for nematode community analy- sis, 50 g of sediment were used for measurement of bacterial biomass, 100 g were dried to constant weight at 80°C to determine water content, and the rest of each sub-sample was air-dried and analyzed for phys- ical and chemical properties, including organic matter, pH, electrical conductivity, total nitrogen, total phos- phorus (measured at the Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences), and sediment grain composition (measured at the Cold and Arid Environ- mental and Engineering Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences). The biomass of sedimentary bacteria was determined by counting bacteria stained with fluoroscein isothiocyanate (FITC) by direct micro- scopic observation (Babiuk & Paul 1970). Standing shoots of plants were harvested in two 25 × 25 cm quadrats along each transect, for the determination of shoot biomass. Surface litter within the quadrat was also collected for the determination of litter biomass. There were no standing shoots of Scirpus in March and no surface litter of Scirpus in August.Nematodes. Nematodes were extracted by flotation in Ludox TM in the laboratory (Griffiths et al. 1990). After counting the total numbers of nematodes under a dissecting microscope, about 100 nematode specimens per sample were randomly selected and identified to genus level in glycerol mounts.Nematodes were assigned to 6 trophic groups (algal feeder, plant feeder, bacterial feeder, fungal feeder, carnivore, and omnivore) according to Yeates et al. (1993). Several ecological indices were calculated to assess the nematode community. The Shannon-Wiener diversity index (H’) was calculated at the genus level. The trophic diversity index (TD) was calculated based on the trophic group ratios.Statistical analysis. The effects of plant type, site, and sampling time on nematodes, sediment properties, and plant characteristics were examined using a 3-way factorial ANOVA. Least-square-difference (LSD) tests were used after the 3-way ANOVA to detect for the differences in environmental variables, nematode genus number, density, Shannon-Wiener diversity in- dex, trophic diversity index, and feeding group propor- tions between the marshes dominated by different plant species at each site in March and August, respec- tively. To meet the assumptions of ANOVA, the pro- portional data were arcsine-square-root transformed and the numeric data were log transformed prior to statistical analyses when necessary. All analyses were executed using the statistical package Statistica (Ver- sion 6.0, StatSoft).All multivariate analyses were undertaken using the PRIMER (Version 5.2) software package (Clarke & Warwick 1994). Using a ranked similarity matrix based on Bray-Curtis similarity measures of log(x + 1) trans- formed nematode genera data, an ordination plot was produced by non-metric multidimensional scaling (MDS). The 2-way crossed analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) (Clarke & Warwick 1994) was used to test vegetation and site effects on the nematode commu- nity. The BIO-ENV procedure (Clarke & Ainsworth 1993) was used to identify the environmental variables that best explained variation in nematode communities at the genus level and the functional group level, respectively. BIO-ENV uses Spearman’s rank correla- tion between the resulting ranked similarity matrices of nematofauna and correlation-based PCA (principal component analysis) of the normalized environmental variables. 

xresults
The magnitude or directions of differences in most sediment conditions between Spartina and 2 native plant marshes varied among the 3 sites and between 2 sampling seasons (Table 1). Most sediment properties were significantly different between Spartina and the 2 native plant marshes, except at Jiuduansha in August (Table 1). In March, Spartina generally had greater shoot biomass, but lower litter biomass than both Phragmites and Scirpus, and the magnitude of the differences varied across sites. In August, Spartina had greater shoot and litter biomass than Scirpus, but the dif- ferences in shoot and litter biomass be- tween Spartina and Phragmites were not consistent at different sites. A 3- way ANOVA shows that all parameters for sediment properties and plant char- acteristics significantly differed among 3 marsh types (Table 2). Except for the percent clay content, all other parame- ters were significantly affected both by an interactive effect between time and plant and by an interactive effect be- tween site and plant (Table 2).A total of 59 nematode genera were identified in our study, more than half of which were bacterial feeders (Table 3). Nematode generic richness, density, values of H’, and TD indices were significantly affected by the plant species (Table 4), and were also signifi- cantly affected by an interactive effect between site and plant. All feeding groups were affected by plant type, except for algal feeders (Table 4). The interactions between plant type and site were significant for all nematode feeding groups (Table 4).No significant difference was obser- ved in nematode genus number be- tween Spartina-invaded and Phrag- mites marshes at any site in the 2 sampling seasons (Fig. 2a). At Dongtan and Jiuduansha, the differences in genus number between Spartina and Scirpus marshes varied with seasons. At Nanhui, Spartina-invaded marshes had lower nematode genus number than Scirpus marshes in both seasons. Total nematode density was significantly higher in Spartina-invaded marshes than in the 2 native plant marshes at Dongtan, but not at Jiuduansha and Nanhui (Fig. 2b). No significant differ- ences in Shannon-Wiener diversity in- dex were found between Spartina- invaded and Phragmites marshes, ex- cept at Jiuduansha in August (Fig. 2c). Scirpus marshes had significantly lower Shannon-Wiener diversity than Spartina-invaded marshes at Nanhui in both seasons. At Dongtan and Jiuduansha, the differences in Shan- non-Wiener diversity between Spartina and Scirpus marshes varied with seasons. Spartina-in- vaded marshes had lower nematode trophic diversity than Phragmites marshes in all comparisons, with sig- nificant differences occurring at Dongtan in August, at Jiuduansha in March, and at Nanhui in both seasons (Fig. 2d). Spartina marshes had significantly lower ne- matode trophic diversity than Scirpus marshes at Dong- tan in both seasons and at Jiuduansha in March, while no significant differences were observed in other cases.The dominant trophic groups were bacterial feeders and algal feeders for all types of marshes (Fig. 3). Per- centages of algal feeders (Fig. 3a) exhibited significant differences among plant species at Dongtan and Nan- hui, while inconsistent differences between Spartina and the 2 native marshes were observed across sites and seasons. In most comparisons, the relative abun- dance of plant feeders (Fig. 3b) and fungal feeders (Fig. 3c) in Spartina marshes was generally similar to that in Scirpus marshes, but lower than that in Phrag- mites marshes. In terms of the bacterial feeders (Fig. 3d), Spartina marshes tended to have more bacte- rial feeders than Phragmites marshes at all sites and in both seasons, with significant differences occurring at Dongtan and Jiuduansha in both seasons and at Nan- hui in March. Spartina marshes also had more bacter- ial feeders than Scirpus marshes, except at Nanhui in August. The percentages of carnivores (Fig. 3e) and omnivores (Fig. 3f) exhibited inconsistent trends among different types of vegetation across sites and between seasons.Two-way crossed ANOSIM revealed highly signifi- cant plant (Global test: R = 0.748, p = 0.001) and site effects (Global test: R = 0.830, p = 0.001) on nematode communities (Table 5). The dissimilarities in nematode communities were smaller between Spartina and Scir- pus marshes (ANOSIM, pairwise test: R = 0.679, p = 0.001) than between Spartina and Phragmites marshes (ANOSIM, pairwise test: R = 0.790, p = 0.001). The non-metric MDS analyses show that all plots for Spartina were completely separated from those for Phragmites marshes, but partly overlapped with those for Scirpus marshes (Fig. 4). The greatest dissimilari- ties of nematode communities among pairs of plants were found between 2 naturally vegetated marshes (ANOSIM, pairwise test: R = 0.852, p = 0.001). The nematode community dissimilarity among pairs of sites was the smallest between Dongtan and Jiuduansha (ANOSIM, pairwise test: R = 0.731, p = 0.001).BIO-ENV analysis was conducted at both the genus level and the functional group level (Table 6). The cor- relation coefficients of the best single environmental variable and combinational variables were generally low (coefficients < 0.25). Water content, electrical con- ductivity, bacterial biomass, and litter biomass were correlated with nematode composition in the analysis both at the genus level and the functional group level. The silt percentage of the sediment was only corre- lated with the nematode community at the functional group level. When the analysis was restricted to the single best variable, water content was the most influ- ential variable.

xdiscussion
Nematode communities as affected by plant speciesIn the present study, we found no significant differ- ences in nematode generic richness or in Shannon- Wiener diversity between Spartina-invaded and Phragmites marshes. This is consistent with the study of Yuhas et al. (2005), in which Spartina and Phrag- mites marshes were found to support similar taxon richness of benthic fauna (both macrofauna and meio- fauna). However, our results are inconsistent with those of Angradi et al. (2001), who found that the taxon richness of macroinvertebrates is greater in Spartina marshes than in Phragmites-invaded marshes in southern New Jersey. Gratton & Denno (2005) found that the changes in arthropod trophic structure after the replacement of Spartina by Phrag- mites are mainly caused by the changes in detriti- vores, herbivores, and carnivores. In this study, Spartina-invaded marshes generally had lower nema- tode trophic diversity than Phragmites marshes, with bacterivores tending to be more common. The nema- tode community structure was found to be distinctly different in Spartina versus Phragmites marshes, as revealed by MDS and ANOSIM analyses. Such differ- ences in community composition have also been found for microbial communities (Ravit et al. 2003) and arthropod communities (Gratton & Denno 2005) on salt marshes in New Jersey, where Phragmites is an invader. Therefore, it can be speculated that the invasion of Spartina and Phragmites into each other affects both aboveground and belowground ecosys- tem processes.Few studies have compared faunal communities between Spartina and Scirpus. One recent study, con- ducted at Dongtan of Chongming Island, shows that the macroinvertebrate species richness and diversity tends to be lower in the Spartina community than in the Scirpus community (Chen et al. 2005). This pat- tern was not observed for nematode generic richness and diversity. Chen et al. (2005) found that invasions of Spartina into the Scirpus community alter the trophic group structure of macroinvertebrates. How- ever, the differences in nematode trophic group pro- portions between Spartina and Scirpus marshes generally varied across sites and between seasons. Therefore, this study did not reveal an apparent dif- ference in nematode taxon richness, diversity, or trophic composition between Spartina and Scirpus marshes. Comparatively, the dissimilarity in the nematode community structure between Spartina and Pharg- mites marshes was greater than that between Spartina and Scirpus marshes, and the dissimilarity between Spartina-invaded and native marshes was even smaller than that between the 2 native plant marshes. In fact, the effects of Spartina invasions on nematode communities depended on which native plant specieswere considered. A similar result has been reported from a terrestrial system invaded by Bromus. Belnap & Phillips (2001) found that the soil biota in plots from Hilaria to Bromus generally respond to the Bromus invasion in an opposite manner compared with plots from Stipa to Bromus. Therefore, it is important to con- sider native plants when the ecological consequences of plant invasions are assessed. Effects of Spartina alterniflora invasions across sitesBased on differences in morphology, physiology, and phenology, it has been documented that the replace- ment of extant marsh vegetation by exotic vascular plants may be expected to alter physical and chemical sediment properties (Talley & Levin 2001). In the present study, the directions and magnitudes of the differences in sediment properties between Spartina and 2 native plant marshes were not consistent among different sites. Our data suggest that the impacts of Spartina invasion on sediment conditions in estuarine marshes of the Yangtze River are site specific and are driven by both plant invasion and natural environmen- tal variation.In the present study, the invasive Spartina generally had greater live shoot biomass than both Scirpus and Phragmites at all sites. Previous studies have indicated that, in the home regions of Spartina, the aboveground vegetation biomass of Spartina is smaller than that of Phragmites (Angradi et al. 2001, Osgood et al. 2003). The present study implies that the exotic plants grow better in the introduced range than in their natural range.In terms of the impacts of invasive plants on animal communities, site effects have been documented pre- viously. Hanson et al. (2002) found that Phragmites in- vasion impacts fishes in some habitats, but not others. Posey et al. (2003) demonstrated that the effect ofmacrophyte type is smaller than that of location in con- trolling macrofaunal distributions. Robertson & Weis (2005) also found apparent between-site variations in their study. Yeates & Williams (2001) investigated the influence of invasive weeds on nematode communities in New Zealand and pointed out that site is an impor- tant factor determining the impact of the invasive plant on nematodes. In this study, prominent site effects were also found in the relationship between nema- todes and vegetation types, especially in the compari- son of abundance, generic richness, diversity, and most feeding group proportions between Spartina and Scir- pus marshes. However, patterns of nematode generic richness and diversity were generally similar between Spartina and Phragmites marshes at all the sites, and Spartina-invaded marshes had generally lower trophic diversity, a higher proportion of bacterial feeders, but a lower proportion of fungal feeders than Phragmites marshes. Therefore, the contribution of site effects var- ied with different extant plant species. Ravit et al. (2003) reported that the differences in microbial popu- lations between plant species depend on the distur- bance level of different sites. In this study, the nema- tode community dissimilarity among pairs of sites was the smallest between Dongtan and Jiuduansha. This is probably because Nanhui was more disturbed than the other sites. In addition to the disturbance level, the his- tories of plant invasion at different sites may also influ- ence the site effects.Although several studies have documented the roles of seasonality in the evaluation of invasive plant effects on fauna (Angradi et al. 2001, Talley & Levin 2001, Osgood et al. 2003), our present study revealed that seasonal variation has less effect on nematode commu- nities than sites and plant species.Underlying mechanisms and trophic implicationsThere were significant physiological and morpho- logical differences between Spartina and the 2 native plants, such as photosynthesis pathways (C4 vs. C3) and salt tolerance (Spartina can excrete salts using its salt glands). The differences in these attributes are expected to change belowground biological communi- ties and their composition (Wardle et al. 2004, Zedler & Kercher 2004), including nematodes. However, the present study revealed that the dissimilarity in nema- tode community structure between 2 C3 plants (Phrag- mites and Scirpus) was greater than that between C3 and C4 plants (native plants and Spartina). This sug- gests that the plant attributes, such as photosynthesis pathways, may not be as important as expected in structuring belowground communities. Two mechanisms have been proposed to explain how plant identity affects belowground biodiversity. First, different plant species may differ in their abilities to control resources available to organisms, through altering biotic and abiotic soil properties (Levin & Tal- ley 2000, Talley & Levin 2001, Neira et al. 2005). Sec- ond, different plant species with different suites of traits may return organic matter of differing qualities or quantities to the soil (Díaz et al. 2004). In the present study, sediment water content, electrical conductivity, bacterial biomass, and litter biomass were identified as the most influential factors in shaping nematode com- munities, suggesting that both mechanisms might coexist in structuring nematode communities in the Yangtze River estuary. Wardle (2006) hypothesized that plant species drive soil organisms through litter production rather than through rhizosphere exudation. Although the rhizosphere characteristics were not investigated, our study did determine that litter pro- duction was more important than live plant biomass in affecting nematode communities. However, in the pre- sent study, the correlations between the environmental variables measured and the nematode communities were generally low at both the genus level and the functional group level. This suggests that other charac- teristics may also play important roles in structuring nematode communities.In the current study, Spartina marshes had generally lower trophic diversity of nematodes than both Scirpus and Phragmites marshes, suggesting that the benthic food web became simpler after the invasion of Spartina. The relative abundance of bacterial-feeding nematodes tended to increase, but fungal feeders tended to decrease in Spartina compared with Phrag- mites communities. Since the abundance of different trophic groups of nematodes may reflect the presence of their food resource, the changes in the relative abundance of bacterial-feeding and fungal-feeding nematodes may be related to increased bacterial activ- ity and suppressed fungal activity in Spartina marshes. These changes in Spartina marshes are likely to alter the decomposition processes, rates, and pathways, which may, in turn, modify belowground nutrient cycling of the estuarine wetlands. Ingham et al. (1985) found that bacterial-feeding nematodes can excrete NH4+-N, which may accelerate plant uptake and growth. Therefore, the trophic changes of nematodes may be expected to affect plant growth and the further expansion of invasive plants like Spartina.

