xabstract
The Yangtze River Estuary is an important eco-region of China; it has, however, been heavily infested with the invasive plant Spartina alterniflora. This study examined the benthic communities associated with the invasive S. alterniflora and two native plants (Scirpus mariqueter and Phragmites australis) at three tidal elevations to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the impacts of marsh plant invasions on intertidal macrofauna of the Yangtze River Estuary. Spartina alterniflora had significantly sparser and taller stems than S. mariqueter, whereas the traits of S. alterniflora and P. australis were relatively similar. A total of 23 macrofaunal taxa were recorded during this study and their mean density was 1885 ind. m  2. Numerically, gastropods and bivalves were the dominant group; together they constituted 95.72% of the total macrofaunal individuals. The differences in macrofaunal community structure were greater among different elevations than between native and exotic plants. The effects of plant types on species richness and densities of macroinvertebrates were generally weak. Densities of only one species (Glaucomya chinensis) differed significantly between S. alterniflora and S. mariqueter marshes at the lower elevation. The tolerance of the macrobenthos to plant invasions thus depends on various factors, including habitats, species of macrofauna, and local plants.

xintroduction
Coastal salt marshes provide an important interface among terrestrial, riverine, and marine ecosystems. They contain unique and irreplaceable natural resources and support key ecosystem processes (Wall et al., 2001). A salt marsh is, however, a fragile ecosystem that is vulnerable to disturbances such as global change, pollution, and plant invasions (Cohen and Carlton, 1998; Grosholz, 2002; Kennish, 2002). In the last decade, plant invasions have received considerable attention in salt marsh ecosystems (Posey, 1988; Callaway and Josselyn, 1992; Posey et al., 1993), where the invasive plants act as ecosystem engineers by exerting impacts throughout the biological community and affecting the entire ecosystem by altering hydrology, particle flux, and habitat avail- ability (Talley and Levin, 2001; Crooks, 2002).Sediment-dwelling infauna is a ubiquitous and abundant component of salt marsh ecosystems (Levin and Talley, 2000). These organisms feed on plant detritus and associated bacteria and micro flora in the sediment (Craft, 2000), serve as diet items for nektonic crustaceans and fishes (Lopez and Levinton, 1987), and are functionally involved in sediment bioturbation and marsh biogeo- chemical cycling (Bertness, 1985; Alkemade et al., 1992). Changes in macrofaunal assemblages are thus possibly induced by changes in vegetation type which would subsequently affect other marsh inhabitants, the flow of energy, and functioning of the ecosystem (Talley and Levin, 2001). Studies addressing the influences of plant invasions on macrofauna have, however, yielded inconsistent results. Invasive plants have been shown to strongly influence macro-invertebrate communities when invading an unvegetated tidal flat either by reducing (Neira et al., 2005, 2006; Levin et al., 2006) or enhancing (Hedge and Kriwoken, 2000) macrofaunal abundance. When exotic plants invaded native plant marshes, the effects of macrophyte replacement on macrofauna were either negative (Talley and Levin, 2001; Brusati and Grosholz, 2006) or subtle (Fell et al., 1998; Hedge and Kriwoken, 2000; Angradi et al., 2001; Posey et al., 2003; Neira et al., 2005; Brusati and Grosholz, 2007). Possible reasons for variability in macrofaunal responses include variability in invasion ages, seasonality, plant species, habitat features, and geographic regions (Talley and Levin, 2001; Neira et al., 2005; Yuhas et al., 2005).The Yangtze River Estuary is an important eco-region of China. It has, however, been heavily infested with the invasive plant Spartina alterniflora, which may threaten the estuary’s biodiversity and its ecosystems (Li et al., 2008). Spartina alterniflora is a perennial grass native to the east and gulf coasts of North America. It was inten- tionally introduced to China in 1979 in order to control erosion. By both natural dispersal and intentional introductions, S. alterniflora rapidly expanded its range and is now widely distributed along the east coast of China, including the Yangtze River Estuary (Wang et al., 2006). The Yangtze River Estuary serves as an important stopover site for migratory birds on the East Asian–Australasian Flyway. Two key native plant species (Scirpus mariqueter and Phragmites australis) provide important habitats for these shore- birds and their food sources. Scirpus mariqueter is the pioneer plant species naturally distributed at the low and middle marshes and extending into the tidal flat, whereas P. australis occupies the higher marshland. The invasive S. alterniflora changed natural plant zonation patterns by expanding into both S. mariqueter and P. australis stands due to its high tolerance to salinity and tidal immersion. All the three plant species form monocultures. Although the majority of available information about salt marsh macrofauna comes from S. alterniflora marshes (Levin and Talley, 2000), only a few investigations have examined the characteristics of the macro invertebrates of S. alterniflora marshes in invasive sites in China (Chen et al., 2005). Our pilot study in 2005 revealed that the total macro-infaunal density did not differ significantly between S. mariqueter and S. alterniflora plant communities (Chen et al., 2005). However, questions still remain, including: (1) does S. alterniflora invasion affect the macrofaunal communities of the two key native plant species (S. mariqueter and P. australis) differ- ently, and (2) because S. alterniflora spreads from low to high marshes, are the influences of plant invasion on infauna different for different flooding conditions?This study was designed to address these questions by exam- ining the benthic communities associated with the invasive Spar- tina alterniflora and the two different native plants at three elevations. At each elevation, paired samples were collected from the monocultures of S. alterniflora and the closely occurring native plant. We hypothesized that: (1) the difference in macrofaunal communities between S. alterniflora and Scirpus mariqueter would be greater than that between S. alterniflora and Phragmites australis because the latter two species have more similar growth forms; (2)the difference in macrofaunal communities between the invasive and native plant communities would be greater at higher than at lower elevations because more frequent inundation at lower elevations would moderate the influences of plant invasion.

xmethods
Samples were collected from salt marshes at Chongming Dongtan (31 250–31 380N, 121 500–122 050E) and Jiuduansha (31 030–31 170N, 121 460–122 150E) (Chen, 2003; Xu and Zhao, 2005), both of which are wetland natural reserves within the Yangtze River Estuary of eastern China (Fig. 1). The vegetated marsh area is 2751.39 hm2 and 3567.42 hm2 at Dongtan and Jiuduansha, respectively (Huang et al., 2005). The dominant native plants at both reserves are Scirpus mariqueter and Phragmites australis. Scir- pus mariqueter forms dense pure stands extending from the unvegetated low intertidal zone to the high intertidal P. australis community, whereas P. australis is mainly limited to upland areas. The tidal marshes now are heavily infested with the exotic plant Spartina alterniflora. Spartina alterniflora has rapidly expanded in S. mariqueter and P. australis vegetated wetlands by forming pure stands that constitute up to 33.1% and 21.4% of total vegetation coverage at Dongtan and Jiuduansha, respectively (Huang et al., 2005). The Yangtze River Estuary is characterized by a warm and humid subtropical monsoonal climate; the annual mean tempera- ture and precipitation are 15.7  C and 1 124 mm, respectively. The intertidal zones are flooded by semi-diurnal meso-tides with average tidal amplitude of 2.67 m. The entire vegetated surface of the salt marshes is inundated only during high spring tides. The salinity varies from 1 to 20.2.2. Sampling and processingBenthic macrofauna were collected on November 8, 2007 and March 31 and June 25, 2008 from Dongtan and on October 27, 2007 and April 27 and June 13, 2008 from Jiuduansha. At both Dongtan and Jiuduansha, samples were obtained at three elevations. The mean elevations were 3.24 m, 3.68 m, and 3.86 m (Fig. 1), and for simplicity we refer to them as lower, middle, and higher marshes. At the lower and middle marshes, the samples were taken from the monocultures of Spartina alterniflora and Scirpus mariqueter. At the higher marshes, the macrofauna were collected from S. alterniflora and Phragmites australis monocultures. There were 8–14 m inter- vals between two plant monoculture stands at each elevation.For macrofaunal samples, five 30 cm   30 cm cores were collected to a depth of 20 cm in each plant monoculture stand. The cores were taken 20–30m apart from each other. Sediment temperature and electrical conductivity were measured directly at 10-cm depth. Beside each core, live stem densities were recorded by counting and averaging the shoots from three quadrats (25 cm   25 cm), and stem height was determined by averaging 15 randomly measured stems. Sediment samples for water content and grain size analyses were collected with a 3.2 cm diameter and 10cm depth tube, and sediment samples for chlorophyll a measurements were collected by scraping an area of 4 cm   8 cm and 5 mm depth of the surface sediment near each core. Sediment grain size was measured during the 2007 samplings, and sediment electrical conductivity was measured during the 2008 samplings.The sediment samples for macrofaunal analyses were washed through a 0.5-mm mesh size sieve and fixed in 10% formalin before identification. At the laboratory, benthic macrofauna were identi- fied to the lowest possible taxonomic level under a dissecting or compound microscope as necessary and then counted. Water content was assessed by drying the sediment at 80  C for 48 h. Sediment grain size composition was determined using an LS100Q laser grain sizer. The chlorophyll a concentration was determined using a spectrophotometric assay and standard equations (Lor- enzen, 1967).2.3. Data analysesTwo-way repeated measure ANOVA was conducted to evaluate the effects of plant type, site, and sampling time on sediment properties, plant traits, and macrofaunal communities. Some data with less than three sampling times were analyzed with two-way ANOVA or three-way ANOVA. Analyses were conducted separately for lower, middle, and higher marshes because of the different pairs of habitats sampled at different elevations. We used least squares differences (LSD) tests to conduct multiple comparisons. Differ- ences were regarded as significant at P < 0.05. Using a ranked similarity matrix based on Bray–Curtis similarity measures of log(x þ 1) transformed macrobenthos abundance data, we produced an ordination plot by non-metric multidimensional scaling (MDS) and pairwise tests by one-way ANOSIM. Similarity percentages (SIMPER) analysis was used to look for those species which contributed most to the average dissimilarity. The BIO-ENV procedure was used to identify the environmental variables that best explained variation in macrofaunal communities (results are shown in Appendix). The BIO-ENV analysis used Spearman’s rank correlation between the resulting ranked similarity matrices of macrofauna and the rank similarity matrix obtained through Euclidean distances with the standardized environmental variables (Clarke and Ainsworth, 1993). All analyses were performed using Statistica 7.0 and PRIMER 5.

xresults
Silt dominated all sediments: the content of fine and coarse silt (4–63 mm) reached 71.86–77.44% at Dongtan and 69.06–71.54% at Jiuduansha (Table 1). The water content of sediment ranged from 27.72% to 40.54%. A significant difference in water content betweendifferent plant types was detected at the lower marshes (F 1⁄4 13.26, P 1⁄4 0.002), but not at the middle (F 1⁄4 2.54, P 1⁄4 0.129) and higher marshes (F 1⁄4 1.06, P 1⁄4 0.317) (Appendix 1). Sediment electrical conductivity was significantly different between plant types at the higher marshes (F 1⁄4 5.66, P 1⁄4 0.023), but not at the lower (F 1⁄4 0.16, P 1⁄4 0.691) and middle marshes (F 1⁄4 0.02, P 1⁄4 0.882). Although not significant, Spartina alterniflora communities generally exhibited higher electrical conductivity than did Phragmites australis communities. The concentration of sediment chlorophyll a was between 0.55 mg g 1 and 13.28 mg g 1 and was not affected by plant type at any elevation. Plant stem density and height was signifi- cantly different between S. alterniflora and Scirpus mariqueter at both the lower marshes (F 1⁄4 90.33, P < 0.001 for stem density; F 1⁄4 539.80, P < 0.001 for stem height) and middle marshes (F 1⁄4 1 378.14, P < 0.001 for stem density; F 1⁄4 934.69, P < 0.001 for stem height) (Appendix 1). The native S. mariqueter was much denser and shorter than S. alterniflora. At the higher marshes, a significant difference for stem density was detected between S. alterniflora and P. australis (F 1⁄4 7.49, P 1⁄4 0.014), but not for stem height (F 1⁄4 2.72, P 1⁄4 0.118). Generally, the native P. australis shoots were denser than S. alterniflora.3.2. Macrofaunal communitiesWe collected a total of 30,539 individuals of 23 invertebrate taxa and the mean density was 1885 ind. m 2. The most common taxonomic groups were gastropods, bivalves, and polychaetes (Table 2). The macrofaunal communities were numerically domi- nated by surface feeders and subsurface deposit feeders. Mean macrofaunal density ranged from 189 ind. m 2 to 2186 ind. m 2 at Dongtan and from 428 ind. m 2 to 4818 ind. m 2 at Jiuduansha. Both species richness and total density tended to decrease along the elevation gradient from lower to higher marshes.A two-way repeated measure ANOVA revealed that the effects of plant type on species richness, total density, densities of common taxonomic groups (gastropods, bivalves, and polychaetes), and common feeding guilds (surface feeders and subsurface deposit feeders) were not significant, but strong interactions between site and time were apparent for almost all of these variables at the lower and middle marshes (Appendix 3).Numerically dominant species (>2%) were Assiminea violacea, Elachisina sp., Glaucomya chinensis, Stenothyra glabra, and Corbicula fluminea at the lower marshes and A. violacea, Cerithidea largillierti, G. chinensis, and Assiminea latericea at the middle marshes (Table 3). All of these species are gastropods and bivalves. Numerically dominant species (>2%) at the higher marshes consisted mostly of polychaetes and gastropods (A. latericea, A. violacea, C. largillierti, Capitella capitata, Cerithidea sinensis, Ilyoplax deschampsi, and Notomastus latericeus). Significant effects of plant type on dominant macrofaunal species were detected only for G. chinensis (F 1⁄4 5.55, P 1⁄4 0.031) at the low marshes (Table 3). Glaucomya chinensis was more common in Scirpus mariqueter than in Spartina alterniflora marshes, with stronger effects observed in June (Fig. 2).Ordination of macrofaunal assemblages revealed that the mac- rofaunal communities were more clearly separated among different elevations than between native and exotic plants (Fig. 3, Appendix 5). ANOSIM analyses indicated that the differences in macrofaunal communities between pairs of plant types at each elevation were insignificant (Appendix 5). BIO-ENV analyses showed that the correlations between environmental properties and the benthic macrofaunal communities were generally weak; the relatively important properties were chlorophyll a concentra- tion and soil temperature (Appendix 6). At the lower marshes, the water content was the strongest correlate for macrofaunal communities, whereas the chlorophyll a concentration was the strongest correlate for macrofauna at the middle and higher marshes. Percent sand, stem height, and chlorophyll a were the best correlates for macrofauna in October–November, March–April, and June, respectively.

xdiscussion
This study provides the first comprehensive investigation of the impacts of Spartina alterniflora invasion on the intertidal macrobenthos at salt marshes of the Yangtze River Estuary, China, taking both native plant types and elevation into consideration.4.1. Sediment properties and plant traitsDifferences in water content and sediment electrical conduc- tivity between native and invasive plants were detectable at the lower marshes and the higher marshes, respectively. In our study areas, the maximum shoot height of the invasive Spartina alterniflora reached 176.5 cm, which was much taller than that of the native Scirpus mariqueter and was similar to the height of the native Phragmites australis. In contrast, the height of S. alterniflora shoots was generally less than 100 cm in its native distributional 4.2. Characteristics of macrofaunal communitiesA total of 23 macrofaunal taxa were collected during this study and the mean density was 1885 ind. m 2. The species richness and density of macrofauna were relatively low compared to those from other salt marsh habitats (Netto and Lana, 1999; Rodrigues et al., 2006). However, our results are comparable to previous studies of the marshes of the Yangtze River Estuary (e.g., Chen et al., 2005; Zhou et al., 2006).Numerically, gastropods and bivalves were the dominant group; together they accounted for 95.72% of the total macrofauna. Many previous studies of the Yangtze River Estuary also reported that mollusks were the dominant infauna (Xie et al., 2008). Other studies have shown that oligochaetes and polychaetes dominate macrofaunal communities in coastal marsh habitats. For example, major macrofaunal taxa within the marsh habitats of the Con- necticut River Estuary, USA include oligochaetes, insect larvae, and polychaetes (Talley and Levin, 2001), the polychaetes and the tanaidacean accounted for 70% of all individuals in Paranagua Bay, Brazil (Lana and Guiss, 1991) and annelids represented 90% of the total macrobenthos abundance of the intertidal mudflats of the Tagus Estuary of Portugal (Rodrigues et al., 2006). 4.3. Impacts of plant typesCompared with the native Scirpus mariqueter in the Yangtze River Estuary’s marshes, the invasive Spartina alterniflora had significantly sparser and taller stems. The big difference in plant traits between S. mariqueter and S. alterniflora resulted in changes in sediment properties such as water content. The difference between the invasive S. alterniflora and the native Phragmites aus- tralis was relatively small. Although S. alterniflora shoots were sparser than P. australis, these two plant species had similar shoot length.The densities of one macrofaunal species (Glaucomya chinensis) differed significantly between Spartina alterniflora and native plant marshes, but significant differences were detected only between S. alterniflora and Scirpus mariqueter communities at the lower marshes. Most studies have revealed that some macrofaunal species are tolerant to plant invasions while others are intolerant (Posey et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2005; Levin et al., 2006). Our results indicated that the tolerance of macrofauna to invasive plants was related to both the native plant species and the habitat. Generally, the differences in densities of macrofaunal species were larger between S. alterniflora and S. mariqueter communities than between S. alterniflora and Phragmites australis communities.The effects of plant type on species richness and density of macro invertebrates were not strong at any elevation when comparing either Spartina alterniflora and Scirpus mariqueter or S. alterniflora and Phragmites australis. This result is consistent with our initial investigation, in which we found that the mean macro- invertebrate density did not differ significantly between S. alterni- flora and S. mariqueter marshes (Chen et al., 2005). Similar results have been reported for other regions. In the Little Swanport Estuary of Australia, differences in species richness and total density of invertebrates between S. alterniflora marshes and native marshes were not statistically significant (Hedge and Kriwoken, 2000). Yuhas et al. (2005) found no apparent difference in taxa abundance and richness in P. australis and S. alterniflora marshes in the Hack- ensack Meadowlands, New Jersey (Yuhas et al., 2005), nor did Posey et al. (2003) in the Chesapeake Bay. Brusati and Grosholz (2006) discovered that native Spartina foliosa marshes contained signifi- cantly higher densities of benthic infauna than adjacent mudflats, while the invasive hybrid Spartina marshes never contained greater infaunal densities than mudflats. However, some studies have reported a difference in macrofaunal density or richness between invasive and native marshes. For example, Talley and Levin (2001) reported that the invasive P. australis marshes supported lower density but higher richness of macrofauna than the native grass marshes along the lower Connecticut River Estuary, USA. Angradi et al. (2001) reported that the benthic communities in native S. alterniflora marshes had a greater abundance and taxa richness than did P. australis marshes. This study revealed that the effects of invasive plants on macro-infaunal abundance and richness are site dependent.We found no significant difference in densities of taxonomic groups between invasive and native plant types at all elevations in our study. Hedge and Kriwoken (2000) also found that Spartina anglica salt marsh and native salt marsh both were dominated by the same taxonomic group: mollusks. However, our results are different from those of other reports. Angradi et al. (2001) found that oligochaetes were more abundant in Spartina alterniflora marshes and that polychaetes were slightly more abundant in invasive Phragmites australis marshes. These results suggest that the annelids were probably more vulnerable to plant invasions than the mollusks. In our study area, where annelids were not dominant, the effects of plant invasions on certain taxonomic groups were not highly evident.Talley and Levin (2001) found that the invasion of Phragmites australis shifted macrofaunal assemblages from dominance by burrowing oligochaetes and midges to dominance by tube building and surface feeding forms. However, Neira et al. (2005) found no significant difference in densities of surface and subsurface deposit feeders between the invasive hybrid and native Spartina. Our study also failed to detect a significant effect of plant invasions on densities of macro-infaunal feeding guilds.4.4. Impacts of elevationAlong the elevation gradient from the lower to higher marshes of the Yangtze River Estuary, significant differences in taxa richness, density of total macro invertebrates, and taxonomic and feeding groups were detected among different elevations. The zonal distribution patterns of macrofaunal communities of salt marsh habitats have been widely reported (Kneib, 1984; Netto and Lana, 1997; Whaley and Minello, 2002). The present study revealed that the effects of elevation on macrofaunal communities were gener- ally stronger than the effects of plant types (Fig. 3, Appendices 1–5).Angradi et al. (2001) reported that the macrofaunal community composition of invasive Phragmites australis and native Spartina alterniflora communities was most similar at marsh edges, where more frequent inundation might have moderated the influence of vegetation types on marsh fauna. However, at our study site the significant difference in densities of certain faunal species (Glau- comya chinensis) between adjacent invasive and native plant stands occurred at the lowest marshes. These disparate results illustrate that tidal inundation might influence different plants differently, which likely depends on site or local plant type.4.5. Conclusion and implicationsIn conclusion, the effect of the invasion of Spartina alterniflora on macro-infaunal communities within native plant stands was rela- tively small in the Yangtze River Estuary. A significant decrease in faunal densities in the invasive Spartina marshes occurred for only one species: the bivalve Glaucomya chinensis. The differences in sediment properties, plant traits, and macrofaunal inhabitants between S. alterniflora and Scirpus mariqueter marshes were generally greater than those between S. alterniflora and Phragmites australis. Contrary to our prediction, the difference in macrofaunal communities between the invasive and native plant communities was greater at lower elevations than at higher elevations.The marshes at the Yangtze River Estuary are the important stopover site for at least 250,000 shorebirds on the East Asian– Australasian Flyway. Seeds of Scirpus mariqueter, gastropods, and bivalves are the main food sources for shorebirds in these marshes (Cui et al., 1985; Zhou et al., 2005). Inevitably, the replacement of S. mariqueter by invasive Spartina alterniflora and the consequently reduced densities of Glaucomya chinensis would be unfavorable for the migrating shorebirds flying over the Yangtze River Estuary.
