xabstract
The abundance of epiphytic macroinvertebrates on aquatic macrophytes can be influ- enced by different plant architecture types. For example, dissected plants can provide epiphytic ma- croinvertebrates more substrate for foraging and more cover from predators than undissected plants. Large changes in macrophyte community composition have the potential to strongly influence whole- lake macroinvertebrate abundance if overall plant architecture changes. For example, when the exotic macrophyte Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum L., EWM), a dissected plant, invades a lake and becomes dominant, fundamental changes in lake-wide plant architecture occur. We conducted a 6-lake field study and a meta-analysis to examine whether macroinvertebrate density and biomass varies predictably with plant architecture and, if so, whether these relationships are evident at the whole-lake scale when EWM dominates the plant community. We found that higher macroinverte- brate densities and biomass per g of plant were associated with dissected plants than undissected plants in both our field study and our meta-analysis of published studies. However, in our field study, macroinvertebrate densities and biomass per g of plant decreased as the % of EWM cover increased across lakes, although not always significantly. This result suggests that EWM provides different habitat for macroinvertebrates than native dissected plants. Therefore, the macrophyte community may support lower densities and biomass of macroinvertebrates when EWM is dominant at the whole-lake scale. Reduced abundance of macroinvertebrates could have strong impacts on other com- ponents of lake food webs.

xintroduction
Epiphytic macroinvertebrates are an impor- tant forage base for many species of juvenile fish that use macrophyte beds for cover and as a source for food (Keast 1984, Diehl and Kornijow 1998, Persson and Crowder 1998). However, epi- phytic macroinvertebrate abundance and diver- sity are variable and sensitive to macrophyte abundance and community composition, mak- ing predictions of macroinvertebrate distribu- tion, diversity, and abundance difficult (Gaufin et al. 1956, Downing and Cyr 1985). Macrophytes are diverse in form, and can be grouped according to architecture based on the number, morphometry, and arrangement of stems, branches, and leaves (Lillie and Budd 1992). Plant architecture may influence the coloniza- tion of epiphytic macroinvertebrates (Jackson 1997) and, therefore, may partly explain the re- lationship between macroinvertebrate abun- dance and submersed macrophytes. Macroin- vertebrate densities are often greater on plants with dissected leaves than plants with undis- sected leaves (Krecker 1939, Andrews and Has- ler 1943, Cattaneo and Kalff 1980, Dvorak and Best 1982). Dissected plants have a higher sur- face area to plant mass ratio and, therefore, may provide more habitat for macroinvertebrates, more food in the form of periphyton for grazing macroinvertebrates, or additional complexity, which offers better refuge from predators (Krull 1970, Gilinsky 1984, Pardue and Webb 1985). However, 2 recent studies found that macroin- vertebrate density did not vary predictably with leaf dissection, but rather was plant-species spe- cific (Cyr and Downing 1988a, b). Contrary to previous studies that examined macroinverte- brates in a single lake, these studies combined macroinvertebrates sampled from multiple lakes, which may have introduced interlake var- iability that could have masked patterns ob- served in previous single-lake studies. Because no studies have explicitly compared within- and across-lake variation in epiphytic macroinverte- brate abundance relative to plant architecture, we still do not know the role that plant archi- tecture plays in determining macroinvertebrate abundance across lakes.Further, previous within-lake studies have not been designed to address questions at the whole-lake scale. For example, many of these studies included relatively few plant species and made little attempt to characterize whole-lake plant community composition or cover, which makes it difficult to extrapolate macroinverte- brate abundance to the whole-lake scale. How- ever, if variability across lakes is high and we wish to understand and manage lakes at the whole-lake scale, then situations may arise for which whole-lake plant composition may be- come especially important, such as when a sin- gle plant species or architecture dominates the macrophyte community. For example, Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum L., EWM), an exotic, submersed, dissected macrophyte species can become dominant in lakes. EWM was introduced to North America prior to 1950 from Europe and now occurs in many temper- ate North American lakes (Couch and Nelson 1985, Smith and Barko 1990, Creed 1998). EWM typically forms dense surface mats or canopies that suppress native plant growth and result in homogeneous macrophyte beds (Aiken et al. 1979, Madsen et al. 1991).Several characteristics of EWM suggest that it should have high macroinvertebrate abundance. Along with having dissected leaves, EWM has a greater surface area for the same unit of bio- mass than 4 other plant species (Sher-Kaul et al. 1995). However, studies have shown that EWM supports fewer macroinvertebrates per g plantthan native plant species, despite its greater sur- face area (Soszka 1975, Dvorak and Best 1982, Keast 1984, Cattaneo et al. 1998). Low macroin- vertebrate densities on EWM are expected based upon research showing that homoge- neous beds of other macrophyte species sup- ported fewer macroinvertebrates than hetero- geneous macrophyte beds (Brown et al. 1988). Unfortunately, we do not know whether differ- ences in EWM cover in lakes affect total ma- croinvertebrate abundance at the whole-lake scale.We address 2 questions in this study: 1) Do macroinvertebrate density and biomass vary predictably with plant architecture? and 2) Do lakes with a higher % of EWM cover have lower macroinvertebrate density and biomass at the whole-lake scale? We answered these questions with a field study of 6 lakes that varied in the % of EWM cover and with a meta-analysis of past studies examining the relationship between plant architecture and epiphytic macroinverte- brate abundance. We hypothesized 1) that ma- croinvertebrate density and biomass are related to plant architecture, with dissected plants hav- ing higher macroinvertebrate densities and bio- mass than undissected plants, and 2) that ma- croinvertebrate density and biomass per g of plant biomass would decrease as % EWM cover increases across lakes.

xmethods
Study areaEpiphytic macroinvertebrates were sampled in July and August 1999 from 6 mesotrophic lakes in southern Michigan, USA, that exhibited a range of % EWM cover. The 6 lakes had sim- ilar summer mean values for Secchi depth, chlo- rophyll concentration, total N concentration, and total P concentration (Table 1), and were part of a study examining the direct and indi- rect effects of whole-lake fluridone (Sonar , SePRO Corporation, Indianapolis, Indiana) treatments on plants, fish, and invertebrates. The 3 lakes with low % EWM cover (Camp, Big Crooked, and Lobdell) were treated in May 1997 with 5 ppb fluridone to reduce EWM abun- dance.Fluridone treatments were unlikely to influ- ence our results for several reasons. First, fluri- done was applied at very low concentrations which are highly selective for EWM (Netherland and Getsinger 1995). Native plant cover was not reduced in the treatment lakes; in fact, it in- creased post-treatment. EWM biomass re- mained low for 2 y after the fluridone treatment (Getsinger et al. 2001). Second, fluridone is not toxic to macroinvertebrates (Muir et al. 1982, 1983, Hamelink et al. 1986, Haag and Bucking- ham 1991), and no difference in macroinverte- brate abundance was found between reference and treatment lakes (M. T. Bremigan, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, un- published data). Last, we sampled 2 y after the fluridone treatment so that the littoral commu- nities of the lakes should have recovered. There- fore, any differences in macroinvertebrate abun- dance found in this study should not be related to the herbicide treatments. SamplingMacrophytes.   Plants were sampled in August 1999 in the 6 Michigan lakes using the point intercept method (Madsen 1999), which esti- mates plant cover, but does not quantify plant density or biomass. Each lake was mapped us- ing a geographic information system and then overlaid with a grid of points to be surveyed (150–250 points per lake covering the entire lake). Points were located in the field with a global positioning system. Water depth was measured at each survey point, a 2-sided mac- rophyte rake was thrown, and plant species presence was recorded.We determined 2 gradients using macrophyte data collected in 1999: 1) % dissected plant cov- er, and 2) % EWM cover. To develop the gradi- ents, we included all submersed and floating leaved macrophytes, thus excluding emergen and free-floating plants. Within the littoral zon (defined as the zone from shore to the deepes point at which plants consistently occurred), w then calculated the % of sites that were vege tated. Thus, we calculated the % of the vegetat ed littoral zone that had either dissected plant or EWM present to determine the gradients fo each lake.Macroinvertebrates. We sampled epiphyti macroinvertebrates from the 5 dominant sub mersed plant species in each lake to characteriz whole-lake macroinvertebrate density and bio mass. We identified dominant plant species us ing vegetation survey results from the 6 lake conducted in August 1998 (Getsinger et al 2001). We adapted the final species list onsit for seasonal and interannual changes that ma have occurred from 1998 to 1999. We sample less common species in a few cases to collect at least 2 species within the 2 plant architecture types (dissected and undissected) and to in- clude EWM in each lake. Therefore, the number of dissected and undissected plants sampled was similar across all lakes. We included Pota- mogeton pectinatus as dissected because it has thin branching leaves like the other dissected plants.We sampled each lake for macroinvertebrates twice during the summer of 1999 (June 28–July 7 and August 16–24). To sample epiphytic ma- croinvertebrates, a snorkeller enclosed  30 to 60 cm of an individual plant stem with a 500- m- mesh bag sampler that measured 65 cm long by 24 cm in diameter (Cheruvelil et al. 2000). We sampled 13 individuals of each plant species for a total of 65 samples per lake per date (except Camp Lake in July when only 4 plant species were sampled), totaling  800 samples. We chose our sample size based on power and sam- ple size analyses from data collected in Heron Lake in August 1998 (Cheruvelil et al. 2000). We sampled epiphytic macroinvertebrates in each lake at 3 to 5 sites separated by  100 m. Each site was  2 m deep, consisted of heterogeneous macrophyte beds, and formed approximately a 10 m radius around an anchored boat. We hap- hazardly sampled 2 to 4 stems from each of the 5 macrophyte species at each site. Samples were stored in a sealed plastic bag and kept cool and dark until further processing.In the lab, we rinsed individual macrophyte stems with water to detach macroinvertebrates, and plants were dried at 105 C for 48 h and weighed to estimate plant biomass. Macroinver- tebrates were preserved in 95% ethanol. We were interested in macroinvertebrate variability across plant species and across lakes, so it was not necessary to count the 13 individual sam- ples. Therefore, the 13 replicate samples from each plant species for each lake were pooled, and subsamples from the pooled sample were used to estimate macroinvertebrate abundance and biomass per plant species. We subsampled by using a rotating apparatus developed by Wa- ters (1969). Subsamples were counted until at least 140 individuals had been counted overall, which resulted in density and biomass esti- mates within 20% of the mean. Macroinverte- brates were identified to the lowest taxonomic level possible (genus, tribe, or family). Each in- dividual was measured to the nearest  m using a drawing tube and digitizing tablet. Individual macroinvertebrate biomass was estimated using length–dry mass regressions from the literature (Rogers et al. 1977, Smock 1980, Meyer 1989, Burgherr and Meyer 1997) and unpublished data from G. G. Mittelbach (Michigan State Uni- versity, East Lansing, Michigan).Data analysisMacroinvertebrates. Cumulative macroinver- tebrate taxa richness was calculated for each lake using only those plant species that were sampled in both July and August (3–5 plant spe- cies per lake). Macroinvertebrates for all other analyses were standardized by plant dry mass (g), which allowed for the comparison of ma- croinvertebrates among different plant species and architecture types that exhibited large dif-ferences in biomass per stem of plant. We report abundance results for July and August separate- ly rather than as an average because macroin- vertebrate life cycles are short and periodic (Gaufin et al. 1956, Soszka 1975, Merritt and Cummins 1996). Thus, density, biomass, and species composition varied throughout the sum- mer. Macroinvertebrate density (number of in- dividuals per g dry plant biomass), biomass (dry mg per g dry plant biomass), average in- dividual biomass (mg), and cumulative taxa richness were ln- transformed.We tested whether macroinvertebrate density and biomass varied predictably by plant archi- tecture using ANOVA and adjusted Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons. We used regression anal- yses across the 6 lakes to determine if macroin- vertebrate density, biomass, individual biomass, and cumulative taxa richness were related to the % of EWM cover in the vegetated littoral zone.Meta-analysisWe performed a meta-analysis to quantita- tively synthesize data from published studies on the relationship between epiphytic macroinver- tebrate density and plant architecture. We in- cluded all field studies in which only lentic, epi- phytic macroinvertebrates were sampled from submersed plants with dissected and undis- sected leaves. Sampling methods differed among studies, but we compared results from the studies by calculating a dimensionless over- all effect size for each individual study (the ratio of the means of the 2 architecture types). Be- cause we calculated a separate dimensionless metric for each study, the different sampling methods and different approaches should not confound comparisons across studies (Fernan- dez-Duque and Valeggia 1993, Gurevitch and Hedges 1999).Data selection.   We found the published arti- cles included in the meta-analysis using com- puter databases (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts [Cambridge Scientific Abstracts], Bi- ological Abstracts, and Institute for Scientific In- formation Science Citation Index Expanded [ISI Citation Databases]). We identified and collected older articles not included in these databases from the reference sections of the more recent articles. These searches resulted in  75 articles. We excluded articles that did not include all of the following data: 1) number of times macroinvertebrates were sampled, 2) sample date, 3) study location, 4) number of macrophyte species sampled, 5) number of individual plants sam- pled within each species, 6) sampler used, 7) or- ganisms sampled, and 8) results for single plant species or plant architecture. This selection pro- cess resulted in data from 13 articles for our fi- nal analysis (Table 2). For articles that reported data in figure form only (Pip and Stewart 1976, Gerrish and Bristow 1979, Kornijow 1989, Chil- ton 1990), we scanned the graphs and interpo- lated the values using Scion Image software (1998. Scion Corporation, Frederick, Maryland).Three of the articles included results from  1 lake or pond (Krull 1970, Cyr and Downing 1988a, Kornijow 1989), resulting in 18 lakes as independent observations. Cyr and Downing (1988a) and Krull (1970) averaged macroinver- tebrate density across multiple lakes. Because these means included among-lake variability, meta-analyses were done with and without these 2 studies. Three articles (Andrews and Hasler 1943, Cyr and Downing 1988a, Cheru- velil et al. 2000) reported macroinvertebrate density from 1 sample date only. Four articles (Pip and Stewart 1976, Gerrish and Bristow 1979, Keast 1984, Chilton 1990) reported multi- ple estimates within a season (May–October), so we averaged densities across the season. For the 2 articles that reported multiple years of data (Soszka 1975, Kornijow 1989), we only used the final year of data to be consistent with all other studies that only had 1 year of data. The re- maining articles presented single mean density estimates for the summer season. We obtained raw data from Cyr and Downing (1988a), but we removed littoral microcrustaceans from their dataset because no other studies included them. We also eliminated single samples that included  1 architecture type from Cyr and Downing (1988a).Data processing.   We performed both weight- ed and unweighted meta-analyses because many of the articles did not provide variance estimates. Weighted meta-analysis incorporates sample variance into the overall effect size (us- ing the variance as the weighting variable), whereas unweighted meta-analysis does not. Our weighted meta-analysis used the 6 lakes that had variance estimates and the 6 lakes in our field study after averaging across months to be consistent with all other studies. Two articles included in the weighted analysis reported var-iance estimates directly (Cyr and Downing 1988a, our study). We calculated variance for the other studies (Andrews and Hasler 1943, Mra- chek 1966, Krull 1970, Kornijow 1989) by aver- aging macroinvertebrate density across  2 plant species within each architecture group (viewing plant species as replicates within ar- chitecture groups as in our study).For both the weighted and unweighted meta- analyses:Effect size  ln[(Average macroinvertebrate density per plant biomass on dissected plants)  (Average macroinvertebrate density per plant biomass on undissected plants)](Cooper and Hedges 1994, Hedges et al. 1999). This natural-log response ratio is centered on 0 (Cooper and Hedges 1994, Hedges et al. 1999), so values  0 indicate that dissected plants have higher densities of macroinvertebrates than un- dissected plants on a plant biomass basis.The weighted meta-analysis was performed with MetaWin (M. S. Rosenberg, D. C. Adams, and J. Gurevitch. 1997. MetaWin: statistical soft- ware for meta-analysis with resampling tests. Sinauer Associates, Sunderling, Massachusetts). MetaWin calculates weights for each effect size as (1/variance) and uses the weighted effect siz- es for hypothesis testing. Because the weighted meta-analysis of 12 lakes included estimates of variance calculated in different ways, and the 6 lakes from our study, we grouped studies ac- cording to author and type of variance estimate and tested for differences between groups using  2 tests. We calculated mean effect size and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the 18 studies in- cluded in the unweighted analysis, and per- formed ANOVAs to examine whether mean ef- fect size differed among study groups accord- ing to the number of lakes sampled (1 or mul- tiple), study area (North America or elsewhere), number of plant species sampled, number of dates sampled (1, multiple, or unknown), organ- isms sampled (all macroinvertebrates, snails only, chironomids only), whether or not EWM was sampled, or decade sampled. 

xresults
Macrophyte and macroinvertebrate communitiesEach of the 6 lakes in our field study had dif- ferent plant assemblages, with a range of 13 to 22 submersed plant species in the vegetated lit- toral zones and a total of 33 species across lakes (Fig. 1). Each lake had different plant assem- blages and plant species richness, but species richness was not related to % EWM cover (r2   0.07, p   0.62). Macroinvertebrate density and biomass were variable across lakes and months, and there was no clear trend in dominant taxa with % EWM cover. A total of 32 macroinver- tebrate taxa were identified across the 6 lakes,although most taxa were uncommon (averaging  1% of total macroinvertebrate density or bio- mass; Cheruvelil 2000). The 6 lakes had similar dominant ( 70% biomass) epiphytic macroin- vertebrate taxa (Table 3). Only 1 to 6 taxa made up  70% of total macroinvertebrate biomass across lakes and months, including amphipods, chironomids, gastropods, and oligochaetes. Some species of weevil (Curculionidae) feed on EWM and have contributed to its decline in some lakes (Trebitz et al. 1993, Creed and Shel- don 1995, Sheldon and Creed 1995). However, in our lakes, this family was only found in 1 lake in July and it accounted for only 0.5% of the total biomass.Macroinvertebrates and plant architectureWe found patterns of higher macroinvertebra- te densities and biomass on dissected compared to undissected plants in both July and August in our 6 study lakes, although many of these comparisons were not statistically significant (Fig. 2). The results of our meta-analysis more strongly supported the hypothesis that dissect- ed plants harbor more macroinvertebrates than undissected plants (Fig. 3A, B). In fact, the weighted meta-analysis showed that dissected plants had almost twice as many macroinver- tebrates per unit of macrophyte biomass as un- dissected plants (Fig. 3B). We also found thatstudies grouped according to the number of plant species sampled, the number of samples within a season (once, multiple, unknown), the decade, the organisms sampled (all macroinver- tebrates, chironomids only, snails only), and whether or not EWM was sampled were not sig- nificantly different from one another (p   0.11). In addition, for the weighted meta-analysis, there were no differences between the 2 meth- ods of estimating variance (with raw data or av- eraging across plant species within architecture groups, p   0.343) or between studies conduct- ed by ourselves versus other authors (p   0.825). However, the 4 studies conducted outside of North America (Soszka 1975, Dejoux 1983, Kor- nijow 1989 [2 lakes: Table 2]) had significantly lower mean effect sizes than the 14 North Amer- ican studies (p   0.017). The 2 multiple-lake studies (Krull 1970, Cyr and Downing 1988a) had lower mean effect sizes than the other 16 studies and the difference was marginally significant (p   0.091). Upon removing these 6 studies, the mean effect size increased from 0.30 (95% CI: 0.01–0.59) to 0.55 (95% CI: 0.22–0.89).Macroinvertebrates and EWMOur study lakes fell along a gradient of dis- sected plant cover ranging from 40 to 98% and a gradient of EWM cover ranging from 20 to 95% of the vegetated littoral zone (Table 4). Per- cent dissected plant cover along the 6-lake % EWM cover gradient significantly increased (Fig. 4). To examine how macroinvertebrates and EWM were related at the whole-lake scale, we regressed macroinvertebrate cumulative taxa richness, densities, biomass, and individual bio- mass for the 5 dominant plant species in eachlake against the % EWM gradient. Cumulative species richness significantly decreased with in- creasing % EWM (Fig. 5) and macroinvertebrate density and biomass significantly decreased with increasing % EWM in July but not in Au- gust (Fig. 6A, B). Average individual biomass was negatively correlated with % EWM cover in both July and August (Fig. 6C). 

xdiscussion
Macroinvertebrates and plant architectureThis study has 2 important conclusions. First, higher macroinvertebrate densities and biomass are associated with dissected plants than undis- sected plants. Use of both a field study and a meta-analysis enabled us to examine patterns from multiple lakes and studies, which helped improve our understanding of the relationship between plant architecture and epiphytic ma- croinvertebrates. The results of our meta-anal- ysis clearly supported the hypothesis that ma- croinvertebrate abundance is higher on dissect- ed plants than undissected plants. However, the results of our field study demonstrated that, al- though dissected plants exhibited higher den- sities and biomass of macroinvertebrates than undissected plants, the differences were not al- ways statistically significant. This result suggests that examining patterns across only 6 lakes may not be enough to detect differences because of high interlake variability; however, significant patterns emerge across multiple studies and more lakes. Thus, organizing plants into plant architecture categories should help re- duce some of the inherent variability associated with estimating epiphytic macroinvertebrate abundance.Our study was not designed to determine why most dissected plants harbor more ma- croinvertebrates than undissected plants, but others have postulated that it is because dis- sected-leaf plants have a higher surface area to plant mass ratio (e.g., Krull 1970, Pardue and Webb 1985, Gilinsky 1984, but see Sher-Kaul et al. 1995, Parsons and Matthews 1995). Whatever the underlying cause, leaf dissection is a much easier and a potentially more reliable metric than surface area to plant mass ratio, which is difficult to measure. Thus, grouping plants by architecture for the purposes of describing pat- terns of epiphytic macroinvertebrate abundance on macrophytes should be transferable to other whole-lake studies.Macroinvertebrates and EWMOur 2nd important conclusion is that EWM dominance may alter the above relationship at the whole-lake scale. Lakes with high % EWM cover may have low macroinvertebrate abun- dance, despite high % cover of dissected plants. We found patterns of decreasing macroinverte- brate density, biomass, average individual biomass, and cumulative taxa richness with in- creasing % EWM cover, although not all regres- sions were significant (Fig. 6). However, the fact that macroinvertebrate abundance never in- creased with increasing % EWM cover, and ac- tually decreased significantly with increasing % EWM cover on some dates, suggests that EWM may alter the relationship between macroinver- tebrate abundance and plant architecture. The mechanisms for these patterns are not clear, but there are several possible explanations. First, the results may be a consequence of EWM’s dense homogeneous canopies, which can alter the un- derlying chemical and physical environment, making it inhospitable for some macroinverte- brate taxa (Unmuth et al. 2000). Second, it is possible that EWM exudes inhibitory chemicals. It has been suggested that other plant species induce a chemically mediated avoidance reac- tion in zooplankton (Lauridsen and Lodge 1996, Burks et al. 2001), although this idea has not been well tested for either epiphytic macroin- vertebrates or for EWM. Our results demon- strate the need for further research to determine how EWM alters the relationship between plant architecture and macroinvertebrate abundance in North American lakes.An alternative explanation for the observed decrease in macroinvertebrate abundance along the % EWM gradient is fish predation. Juvenile bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus Rafinesque) are of- ten the dominant littoral-zone macroinvertebra- te predators in these types of lakes (Mittelbach1988). If bluegill densities were influencing the observed relationship between macroinvertebra- te abundance and % EWM cover, we would ex- pect to see an increase in juvenile bluegill den- sity with increasing % EWM cover. However, ju- venile bluegill density (measured as catch per unit effort) and % EWM cover were not related (r2   0.333, p   0.301; R. D. Valley, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, un- published data). Thus, bluegill predation does not appear to affect the observed macroinver- tebrate abundance patterns.Although we found decreases in macroinver- tebrate abundance with increasing % EWM cov- er, not all regressions were significant. There are several possible explanations for these weak re- lationships. First, the lake lowest on the EWM gradient (Camp Lake) experienced a decrease in macroinvertebrate densities and biomass from July to August (p   0.001; Fig. 6A, B), which was caused by the emergence of odonates and chironomids in July (Cheruvelil 2000). Therefore, seasonal macroinvertebrate fluctuations may have contributed to our inability to detect a pat- tern with macroinvertebrates and % EWM cover across the 6 lakes in August. Second, macro- phyte senescence, which starts in late summer for some plants, may have affected macroinver- tebrate density and biomass, and our ability to detect patterns in August. Third, we sampled epiphytic macroinvertebrates from plants in rel- atively heterogeneous macrophyte beds, even in lakes dominated by EWM. However, macroinvertebrate abundance and taxa richness are low within the interior of dense homogeneous beds (Sloey et al. 1997). Therefore, we may have un- derestimated the effect of EWM on macroinver- tebrate abundance by only sampling plants from heterogeneous beds. Had we sampled the characteristic dense mats of EWM, we might have seen stronger negative relationships be- tween macroinvertebrates and % EWM cover.In conclusion, additional research is needed to examine the complex relationship between macroinvertebrates and % EWM cover at the whole-lake scale. The results of our study have implications for lake food webs and manage- ment because macroinvertebrates are an integral component linking macrophytes, fish that con- sume macroinvertebrates, and piscivorous fish. Research on foodweb effects of EWM on mul- tiple trophic levels should help improve lake management.
