xabstract
The socio-economic impacts of the free-floating aquatic plant water hyacinth,
Eichhornia crassipes (Pontederiaceae), on aquatic systems are well documented, yet the
impacts on aquatic biodiversity, particularly invertebrate biodiversity, are less well
understood. This study aimed to determine whether the presence of water hyacinth altered
the diversity and assemblage structure of benthic macroinvertebrates in a conservation
area. The benthic macroinvertebrate assemblage was sampled over 1 year at five sites
under water hyacinth mats and at five sites without water hyacinth at Lake Nsezi—Nseleni
River in the vicinity of Richards Bay, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Artificial substrates
were placed beneath water hyacinth mats or in the open water to allow for colonization by
freshwater macroinvertebrates, and left for a period of 6 weeks, repeated on seven occasions.
Twenty nine families comprising 18,797 individuals were collected, 817 (13 families)
individuals were from under water hyacinth mat sites compared to 17,980 (27
families) individuals from open water sites. Ninety-eight percent of individuals collected
were, however, the invasive snail, Tarebia granifera. Open water samples were separated
from samples beneath the water hyacinth mat by non-metric Multidimensional Scaling,
indicating reduced biodiversity associated with the presence of water hyacinth. Exclusion
of the dominant Thiaridae from the analysis did not alter the groupings. Family richness(
s) and abundance (N) were significantly higher in open water communities(S:
H3 = 21.09; P = 0.0001; N: H3 = 22.58; P = 0.00001), while evenness (J’) was higher
under water hyacinth mats (H3 = 20.13; P = 0.0002). The presence of water hyacinth had
a significantly negative impact on aquatic macroinvertebrate biodiversity in a conservation
area, and therefore the control of this invasive aquatic plant must play a major role in
catchment management.

xintroduction
Water hyacinth, Eichhornia crassipes (Pontederiaceae), a free-floating aquatic plant native
to the Amazon Basin, is listed as one of the top 100 invaders in the world (Global Invasive
Species Database (GISD) 2005). While the statement ‘the world’s worst aquatic weed’ is
frequently cited, relatively few studies have actually quantified the socio-economic and
environmental impacts associated with this weed. A primary focus of invasion biology is
assessing the impacts of invaders, yet conservation biologists and managers spend an
inordinate amount of time trying to control invasive species in order to mitigate their
effects, and repair ecosystems, without having quantifiable goals against which to measure
success.
Introduced into South Africa as an ornamental plant in 1908 (Hill and Cilliers 1999),
water hyacinth remains the country’s most difficult aquatic weed to control despite efforts
initiated in the 1960s (Coetzee et al. 2011). Because southern Africa lacks natural lake
systems due to the geology of the region, it has a depauperate indigenous floating aquatic
plant diversity (Cook 2004). The construction of manmade dams and impoundments has
therefore created ideal habitats for invasive floating macrophytes, such as water hyacinth,
to invade as a result of vacant niche availability (Davies and Day 1998). Since its introduction,
water hyacinth has spread throughout South Africa, including into many protected
areas, such as the Kruger National Park, South Africa’s flagship protected area.
The negative effects of water hyacinth on freshwater systems are undoubtedly numerous
and varied, largely due to its rapid growth which results in expansive colonies of tall
interwoven floating plants. As its doubling time is as little as 1 week under suitable
conditions (Edwards and Musil 1975), infestations blanket large water bodies soon after it
invades, creating impenetrable barriers which have significant negative socio-economic
impacts (Coetzee et al. 2009). Whilst the socio-economic effects of water hyacinth have
been fairly well documented, its impact on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning are less
well understood [see Villamagna and Murphy (2010) for a full review]. Water hyacinth
competes with other plants when drifting mats that scour vegetation destroy native plants
and habitats (Center et al. 2002). Increased detrital production and siltation under dense
water hyacinth mats results in higher sediment loading, which, in combination with a
reduction in light availability to submerged plants, depletes oxygen for aquatic communities
(Ultsch 1973; Mitchell 1985; Rommens et al. 2003). Phytoplankton diversity is
thereby reduced (Rommens et al. 2003; Mangas-Ramirez and Elias-Gutierrez 2004) which
alters the composition of invertebrate communities (Brendonck et al. 2003; Toft et al.
2003). For example, Masifwa et al. (2001) showed an increase in macroinvertebrate
abundance at the edges of water hyacinth mats on Lake Victoria, Uganda, while Toft et al.
(2003) demonstrated significant ecological alterations to invertebrate assemblages in the
surrounding community as a result of water hyacinth invasion in the Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta, California, USA. However very few, if any studies, have investigated the
effect of water hyacinth invasion on benthic macroinvertebrate assemblages. Most studies
concentrate on epiphytic invertebrate abundance which often show inflated assemblage
diversity due to the abundant habitat provided by water hyacinth roots (e.g. Schramm et al.
1987; Brendonck et al. 2003; Rocha-Ramı´rez et al. 2007). Yet due to their sensitivity to
environmental conditions, benthic macroinvertebrates are an ideal indicator group to
monitor the impacts of an invasive species on community structure and biodiversity
(Thirion 2000). The importance of benthic macroinvertebrates in freshwater species was
reviewed by Covich et al. (1999) who highlighted their fundamental role in food webs
through their acceleration of detrital composition, which results in the release of bound
nutrients into the system, and their significant positions as both predators and prey in these
diverse systems. Any alteration to the composition of these communities could have
adverse effects on the integrity of the freshwater system which depends on how the benthic
species contribute to complex food webs.
With the exception of a study by Midgley et al. (2006) who showed that water hyacinth
mats significantly reduced the diversity and abundance of benthic invertebrates in an
impoundment in the Eastern Cape Province of South Africa, there are no examples of
quantified impacts of water hyacinth on the biodiversity of aquatic systems in South Africa,
let alone within protected areas which need biodiversity benchmarks against which to
measure control efforts. One such protected area is the Enseleni Nature Reserve, an Ezemvelo
KwaZulu-Natal Wildlife protected area near Richards Bay in the KwaZulu-Natal Province of
South Africa, where water hyacinth was first identified in the Nseleni and Mposa Rivers in
1982. By 1983, the river was 100 % covered. An integrated management plan combining
biological and herbicidal control measures was implemented in 1995 and resulted in a
reduction of the weed from 100 %cover to less than 20 %cover in 5 years (Jones 2001). Due
to the limited amount of information available on the impact of water hyacinth on biodiversity
in South Africa, particularly in conservation areas, this study aimed to determine the effect of
water hyacinth mats on benthic aquatic macroinvertebrate diversity, under experimental
conditions, in the Enseleni Nature Reserve. Understanding the effect that invaders such as
water hyacinth have on biodiversity justifies the expectations of their control.

xmethods
Study area
This study was conducted on the Nseleni River, in the proximity of Lake Nsezi
(28843054.6700S and 31858047.7700E), to the west of Richards Bay on the north coast of
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, between November 2007 and November 2008. The Enseleni
Nature Reserve is the only formally protected area within the City of uMhlathuze. All of
the surrounding area has been transformed to residential areas, sugar cane farms and
eucalyptus tree plantations. The nature reserve has therefore become a refuge and nucleus
for biodiversity, with the Nseleni River being a conduit for aquatic biodiversity between
the protected area and outlying areas.
Experimental design
Five paired sites were randomly chosen, approximately 3 m from the water’s edge, which
had permanent mats of water hyacinth (extending approximately 8 m from the edge which
were constant in size), and adjacent control sites, 5 m away, that had no water hyacinth
cover and had not had any water hyacinth cover for at least 3 years. The five sites were
between 50 and 80 m apart, and approximately 1.5 m deep.
Artificial substrates were constructed using mesh bags (20 9 50 cm2, 2 mm mesh size)
filled with 2 kg of small pebbles (*3–5 cm diameter) to allow for colonization by
freshwater macroinvertebrates, the units of biodiversity assessed in this study. The bags
were closed using a cable tie, and were fastened to a 2 m length of nylon string which was
attached to two plastic toilet cistern floats and a 30 cm wooden dropper to allow for relocation
at each sampling event. Five sample bags per site were placed in the centre of the
sample sites and allowed to sink to the river bottom. They were left for a period of 6 weeks
to allow for complete colonization by macroinvertebrates (Thirion 2000), and were then
removed from the field for investigation. This was repeated on seven occasions, at six
weekly intervals with the first set of bags placed in the river on 4 November 2007 and the
last on 12 November 2008.
Sampling and data collection
At each sampling event, the artificial substrates were carefully removed from the water and
placed into large plastic bags. The plastic bags were placed below the water surface with
the openings slightly above the water level until the artificial substrate bag reached the
surface, at which point the plastic bag was dropped below the water level to ensure no loss
of specimens. Artificial substrate bags were then replaced at each site. All bags were
returned to a field laboratory where the contents (pebbles) of each sample bag and the
sample bag itself were emptied into a sorting tray, and were washed with clean water to
separate any invertebrates from the bag and pebbles. Each pebble was cleaned with fresh
water and a small paint brush. Both the sample bag and individual pebbles were examined
for invertebrates before being removed from the sorting tray. The contents from the plastic
bag were mixed with fresh water and were also emptied into the sorting tray. The contents
of the sorting tray (water and substrate) were then strained through a sheet of mesh
(1 9 1 mm) and macroinvertebrates and invertebrate body parts were removed with forceps
and placed into glass vials, containing 75 % ethanol. Specimens were identified to
family level, under a dissecting stereomicroscope, using a series of identification keys (Day
and De Moor 2002; Gerber and Gabriel 2002; Day et al. 2003; De Moor et al. 2003a, b). In
some instances, individuals were only identified down to order e.g. Hirudinea and Oligochaetae,
as keys to families in these orders were not available. Numerical abundance of
each taxon per sample bag, per site was quantified.
Data analysis
In order to determine if the study sampled sufficient invertebrate families, sample-based
accumulation curves were compiled from the abundances of each sample bag, per site,
using the analytically calculated Sobs (Mao Tao) (number of species expected), the
Michaelis–Menten Mean (MMMean) estimator (Toti et al. 2000) and the incidence-based
coverage estimator (ICE) (Chazdon et al. 1998), for each site, using EstimateS V8.0.0
(Colwell 2005). The richness estimates are considered representative when the observed
sample-based accumulation curves and the estimators converge closely at the highest
observed richness (Longino et al. 2002).
In order to quantify the impacts of water hyacinth on benthic macroinvertebrate
assemblages, multivariate community analyses of the family abundance data were conducted
in Primer v6.1.11 (Clarke and Warwick 2001). Abundances from each sample bag
per site were summed and analysed as total numerical abundance. A non-metric Multi-
Dimensional Scaling (nMDS) plot was constructed following resemblance analysis using
the Bray-Curtis measure of similarity to examine relationships between benthic macroinvertebrate
assemblages beneath water hyacinth mats and those in open water environments.
In addition, due to the abundant presence of an invasive snail, Tarebia granifera
(Thiaridae) in the open water samples, an additional nMDS plot was constructed excluding
the family Thiaridae, to investigate its effect on the assemblages because the dominance by
one group could mask the results.
A number of measures of diversity were calculated in EstimateS V8.0.0 to determine
differences in invertebrate diversity beneath water hyacinth mats and in open water for
each sample period using total abundance values, including total family richness (S),
individual abundance (N), and Pielou’s evenness (J’) (Magurran 2004). Once again,
analyses were conducted both including and excluding the dominant family, Thiaridae.
Kruskal–Wallis ANOVAs, followed by multiple comparisons tests compared differences
in diversity measures across the seven sample periods between beneath water hyacinth
mats and open water sites, in the presence and absence of the Thiaridae.

xresults
A total of 29 different families comprising 18,797 individuals was recorded (Table 1). Of
the individuals collected, 817 were from under water hyacinth mat sites (WH) compared to
17,980 from open water sites (OW). More taxa were collected from the open water (27
families) in comparison to those from samples gathered from under water hyacinth mats
(13 families).Snails in the family Thiaridae were by far the most abundant benthic
invertebrate family sampled both under water hyacinth mats and in open water—15,694
individuals were collected (85 %) (Table 1). Ninety-eight percent of individuals in this
family were identified as the invasive snail, Tarebia granifera (83 % of all specimens
identified). Hirudinea, Polycentropidae, Oligochaetae and Leptophlebiidae were the next
abundant taxa across both sites (Table 1). Rarefaction curves showed a significant difference
in projected family richness between the open water and under water hyacinth
samples, indicated by the non-overlapping confidence bands (P\0.05) (Fig. 1). These
results show that the presence of water hyacinth significantly reduced species richness of
the benthic communities beneath the water hyacinth canopy.
Results of the nMDS indicated the presence of two distinct assemblages (Fig. 2a),
comprising one group of open water sample events 1–7 and the other group of under the
water hyacinth canopy sample events 1–7. Similarly, when the dominant family, Thiaridae,
was excluded from the analysis, the same two distinct groupings are evident (Fig. 2b).
Thus, despite the abundant presence of the invasive snail, the presence of water hyacinth
significantly altered the benthic invertebrate assemblages.
A number of diversity measures were considered in this study to determine the effect of
water hyacinth on benthic invertebrate assemblages. With the dominant family included in
the analyses, total family richness (S) (Fig. 3a) and abundance (N) (Fig. 3b) were both
significantly higher in open water communities (S: H3 = 21.09; P = 0.0001; N:
H3 = 22.58; P = 0.00001). Pielou’s evenness (J’), the ratio of observed diversity to
maximum diversity, was used to measure evenness. Unlike the previous two measures,
evenness was not significantly different between the two sites even though more individuals
from fewer families were found underneath water hyacinth mats compared to open
water (H3 = 20.13; P = 0.0002) (Fig. 3c). When the Thiaridae were excluded from the
analyses, there was no significant difference in family richness (S) within sites because one
family was excluded from both treatments (H3 = 21.09; P = 0.0001), but due to the sheer
numbers of the Thiaridae in the open water sites, abundance (N) was significantly reduced
in their absence (H3 = 22.58; P = 0.00001). On the other hand, evenness was significantly
higher in the open water sites with the Thiaridae excluded from the analysis, again due to
their sheer numbers (H3 = 20.13; P = 0.0002).

xdiscussion
The ultimate goal of tackling biological invasions ‘should be the conservation or restoration
of ecosystems to preserve or re-establish native biodiversity and functions’ (Hulme
2006). Yet without knowing how invasive species impact indigenous community structure
and functioning, there is no way of measuring a return to a functioning state. Conservationists
and managers are under increasing pressure to mitigate the negative effects of
invasive species on ecosystem dynamics, but in the absence of quantifiable results, it is
difficult to understand these impacts (Richardson and Van Wilgen 2004), let alone manage
them. This study quantified the effect of water hyacinth on assemblage structure and
diversity of aquatic macroinvertebrates in a protected area, the Enseleni Nature Reserve,
and demonstrated, categorically, that water hyacinth alters benthic invertebrate assemblages,
and reduces macroinvertebrate diversity beneath its mats.
Of the benthic invertebrates that were found under the water hyacinth mats, 49 % came
from families that are considered highly tolerant of pollution (e.g. Hirudinea, Planorbidae,
Oligochaeta and Chironomidae), 43 % were moderately tolerant of pollution (e.g. Leptophlebiidae
and Lestidae) and 8 % have a very low tolerance to pollution (Polycentropidae)
according to the South African Scoring System (SASS version 5) which was
developed as a biotic monitoring tool for freshwater habitats (Dickens and Graham 2002).
There was a far higher diversity of benthic invertebrates collected from open water sites
without water hyacinth and represented families in the Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera and
Odonata, all of which are indicative of less impacted aquatic ecosystems (Dickens and
Grahams 2002).
The importance of benthic invertebrates in ecosystems generally goes unnoticed
because they are cryptic, occurring below the water’s surface, until unexpected changes
occur in ecosystems (Covich et al. 1999). Any change or reduction in benthic invertebrate
diversity has important consequences for ecosystem functions such as sediment mixing,
nutrient cycling and energy flow through food webs (Lindegaard 1994; Wallace and
Webster 1996). Indeed, Neira et al. (2005) demonstrated the multiple physical, chemical,
biotic and trophic effects of the invasion of mudflats by a hybrid form of the eastern
cordgrass Spartina alterniflora in San Francisco Bay, CA., USA, which have resulted in
substantial changes in benthic communities that are likely to have important effects on the
entire ecosystem. While the knock-on effects of altered benthic macroinvertebrate
assemblages as a result of water hyacinth invasion were not investigated here, it is
imperative to protect the diversity of these benthic communities to lower the risk of
unexpected and unwanted consequences as demonstrated by studies such as Neira et al.
(2005), particularly in conservation areas.
This study has also elucidated the impressive invasion of the Nseleni River by the snail
T. granifera, which has been recorded before in high densities in this river by Appleton
et al. (2009). Eighty-three percent of all specimens collected in this study were identified as
T. granifera. This species is indigenous to south-east Asia but has been moved around the
world in the aquarium trade and is now regarded as invasive in North and South America.
It was first recorded in South Africa in 1999 from a reservoir south of Richards Bay/
Empangeni, northern KwaZulu-Natal, and since then has become widespread in the eastern
half of South Africa (Appleton and Nadasan 2002; Appleton et al. 2009). Despite its
impressive invasive tendencies, even it is excluded by the presence of water hyacinth—in
this study, there was a 90 % reduction in its abundance under water hyacinth mats. Furthermore,
when excluded from the community and diversity analyses, there were no significant
changes in the assemblage or diversity patterns, with the exception of abundance
and evenness in the open water sites as a result of the sheer numbers of these snails. To
date, the effect of T. granifera on the benthic fauna of invaded habitats in South Africa has
not been demonstrated, but it has been associated with the disappearance of two indigenous
benthic gastropod species from rivers in Puerto Rico (Samadi et al. 1997) suggesting that
there is potential for detrimental impacts in South Africa too, which need to be
investigated.
In addition to the invasion of the Nseleni River by water hyacinth and T. granifera, an
invasive loricariid catfish, Pterygioplichthys disjunctivus (Weber 1991), has recently
established a self-perpetuating population in the system (Jones et al. 2013), suggesting that
‘‘invasional meltdown’’, as postulated by Simberloff and Von Holle (1999), has occurred.
This theory proposes that ecosystems become more easily invaded as the cumulative
number of species introductions increases, and that facilitative interactions can exacerbate
the impact of invaders. Future studies therefore need to prioritize investigating the combined
effect of water hyacinth, the thiarid snail and the catfish on benthic biodiversity and
ecosystem functioning of this protected area.
In conclusion, while studies have demonstrated the positive attributes of water hyacinth,
such as nutrient control, phytoremediation and increased biodiversity in certain assemblages,
the costs associated with its presence in the majority of systems around the world
far outweigh its benefits. The results of this study and those of Midgley et al. (2006) have
shown that dense water hyacinth cover significantly impacts the biodiversity of benthic
invertebrate assemblages, which is of particular importance in protected areas, such as the
Enseleni Nature Reserve, whose mission statement is ‘‘to ensure effective conservation and
sustainable use of KwaZulu Natal’s biodiversity in collaboration with stakeholders for the
benefit of present and future generations’’ (www.kznwildlife.com). Thus mitigating the
negative impacts of water hyacinth invasion on biodiversity warrants its control.