xabstract


The escape of ornamental plants is a main pathway of invasion into many ecosystems. Non- native plants can alter basal resources and abiotic factors leading to effects that ripple throughout an ecosystem. Invertebrates mediate these effects— responding quickly to abiotic and primary producer changes and, in turn, influencing other species. Invasions are of particular concern in the coastal sage scrub ecosystems of Southern California, where
habitat loss and urban encroachment increase invasive species propagule sources and decrease native com- munity resistance. The introduced annual Chrysan- themum coronarium (crown daisy) is a common invader with largely undocumented community-level effects. Our study tested the relationships between the invasive Chrysanthemum and a coastal scrub inverte- brate community using a field study at the Tijuana River Estuary. We found similar or lower abundances and diversity of canopy fauna in the presence of Chrysanthemum. Community composition dramati- cally differed, however, in the presence Chrysanthe- mum, which was associated with higher abundances of dipterans, wasps and flower beetles, and lower abun- dances of hemipterans and thysanopterans than native shrubs. Differences in communities were consistent at the species- and order-levels, and were associated with the generally greater plant biomass and shadier conditions afforded by the natives. This study reveals that even a proportionally small amount of Chrysan- themum may shift the invertebrate community through alterations of abiotic properties and plant biomass. We recommend that Chrysanthemum be removed at the first sign of invasion or that spread is prevented since effects on the invertebrate community are dramatic and occur quickly.



xintroduction




The escape of ornamental plants from landscaping is a
main pathway by which plants invade many ecosystems
(Reichard and White 2001). Ornamental plants
are particularly high-risk invaders because many of
the traits that make them desirable landscaping plants,
such as fast growth rates and suitability for the climate
and its physical challenges, also make them effective
invaders (Bell et al. 2003). The plants often causing
the most dramatic changes to an ecosystem are those
that are most novel, in that they differ the most from
natives or are capable of capitalizing on open
resources (Simberloff 1991). This is the case with
the annual Chrysanthmum coronarium (crown daisy,
hereafter ëëChrysanthemumíí), which invades the
perennial-dominated coastal sage scrub of Southern
California. Introduced annual plants can quickly
colonize and dominate disturbed open areas or gaps
(Speziale and Ezcurra 2011), and limit growth of
slower growing perennials. Often, if the invading
species is novel, even the early stages of invasion can
significantly alter the ecosystem (e.g., Crooks 2002).
For example, the size, complexity, chemical make up,
and life-cycle of annuals can significantly differ from
native perennials (Cui et al. 2011; Bustamante et al.
2006). Such introduced plants can alter bottomñup
processes through shifts in basal resources (Whitcraft
et al. 2008; Rau et al. 2011), physical conditions
(Talley and Levin 2001; Talley et al. 2012), and
disturbance regimes (Mack et al. 2001), and alter topñ
down processes through shifts in relative abundances
of natural enemies and herbivores (Pearson 2009). The
invertebrate communities of an ecosystem often
mediate these effects, responding quickly to changes
and in turn influencing other species (Schowalter
2011), such as vertebrate predators.
The invasion of annuals like Chrysanthemum are of
particular concern in the coastal sage scrub ecosystems
of Southern California, where habitat loss, encroachment,
and degradation resulting from dense urban
development increase propagule sources and decrease
native community resistance to invasion (Reichard and
White 2001; Simberloff 2009;Huang et al. 2011).While
Chrysanthemumis a common invader in various regions
of the United States, including Southern California
where it commonly forms monocultures (Cal-IPC
2006), its effects on invertebrate communities and
ecosystem processes are largely undocumented (e.g.,
Cal-IPC 2006). The goal of this study was to, therefore,
determine the effects of a Chrysanthemuminvasion on a
coastal sage scrub invertebrate community in Southern
California. We accomplished this goal by testing the
following predictions:
1. Invertebrate diversity and abundance will be
lower with higher Chrysanthemum abundance
because Chrysanthemum is less able to ameliorate
stressful physical conditions, and it is generally
smaller and less complex, both of which result in
less usable trophic and non-trophic resources for
invertebrates.
2. Invertebrate community composition on the introduced
Chrysanthemum will differ from the communities
living on native shrubs as related to the
differences in plant structure and size, plant life
cycle and the physical conditions associated with
each plant type. For example, we expected fewer
hemipterans and thysanopterans (i.e., generally
phytophagous), and spiders (i.e., rely on canopy
structure) on Chrysanthemum because the plants
are generally smaller, less complex, and less able
to lessen physical stress than perennial natives.We
expected more hymenopterans, dipterans and
coleopterans (i.e., likely to be associated with
conspicuous flowers and plant debris) on Chrysanthemum
than the native perennial shrubs.
xmethods


We conducted an observational study during early
spring 2011 in a 5.5 ha area of coastal sage scrub at the
north end of the Tijuana River National Estuarine
Research Reserve and Tijuana Slough National Wildlife
Refuge in Imperial Beach, CA, USA (Fig. 1). This
area contains a mosaic of intact and invaded coastal
sage scrub with patches dominated by Artemisia
californica (California sagebrush, hereafter ëëArtemisiaíí),
Artemisia-native plant mix (Artemisia, Eriogonum
fasciculatum, Frankenia salina, Lycium
californicum, Isocoma menziesi, Rhus integrifolia,
hereafter referred to by genus names), Chrysanthemum
and native plant mix, and Chrysanthemum
monocultures. Eight to nine 2 9 2 m plots were
established within each of these four different plant
assemblages in as interspersed a design as possible
xresults


Fig. 1). Plot type was defined using the proportional
abundance (% volume) of each plant species within
plots (Table 1). When Artemisia or Chrysanthemum
dominated an area, they made up 93ñ100 % of the
total plant volume, while cover of these species in
mixed plots ranged from 40 to 84 %, so these ënatural
breaksí were used to define the four plot types. We
chose plots with similar topography (avg ± 1 SE
elevation: 2.24 ± 0.1ñ2.46 ± 0.07 m NAVD; slope:
2.3 ± 0.4ñ3.4 ± 0.8; ANOVA P C 0.11; San Diego
County LiDAR contours (CaSIL 2011) and sediments
(all sandy clay loam or loamy sand as determined by
texture by feel) to reduce environmental variability
between plots in order to focus on differences
associated with the plant community.
Canopy invertebrate sampling
Between 21 and 25 March 2011, we sampled the
invertebrate community in the canopies of each plant
species living within each plot. We sampled similar
numbers of each plot types each day to avoid
confounding effects of time or weather in our comparisons
of plot type and plant species. The weather
was partly sunny, with temperatures of 18.3ñ21.1 C
throughout the sampling. Each canopy was sampled
by continuously passing a gas powered leaf blower
adapted to vacuum (Buffington and Redak 1998) over
green foliage (canopy) and live main and secondary
stems with equal sampling effort per unit plant
volume. Canopy invertebrate samples were sorted
from plant material and debris, and enumerated within
order and within species or, if unknown, morphospecies
groupings. With the help of identification guides
and taxonomic experts, we identified each morphospecies
to the lowest taxonomic level feasible (often
family). If species level identification could not be
made, we still maintained the morphospecies distinctions
(e.g., Chrysomelidae sp. 1, Chrysomelidae sp. 2).
Species diversity (species richness and H0) and total
abundance per plot and per plant were then calculated. Environmental variables
Between 28 March and 01 April 2011, we measured
the physical characteristics associated with each plant
species including plant percent canopy cover (visually
estimated), plant volume (plant height 9 longest
canopy diameter 9 perpendicular canopy diameter),
relative temperature and humidity (relative to ambient)
taken 2.5 cm above the ground, and canopy light
attenuation. As with invertebrate sampling, we sampled
similar numbers of each plot type each sampling
day to avoid confounding effects of time in comparisons.
Photosynthetic-light was measured using an
Apogee Quantum handheld light meter, and both
humidity and temperature using an Extech humidity/
temperature pen. Physical measurements were made
during mid-day (10 a.m.ñ2 p.m.) over two consecutive
sunny days. Three measures were taken at each plant,
averaged, and then standardized to above canopy
conditions [e.g., under-canopy light (lmol photons
m-2 s-1)/full sunlight (lmol photons m-2 s-1)].
Statistics
All data were log(x ? 1) transformed or arcsin square
root transformed (proportion data) before analyses to
meet the assumptions of normality and homogeneity
of variance for the statistical tests used (Clarke 1993;
Zar 2009). Differences in environmental variables,
and invertebrate total abundance, and diversity (species
richness and H0) between plot and plant types
were performed using nested ANOVA in JMP 9
Statistical Software.
Multivariate analyses were carried out on environmental
conditions and invertebrate assemblages using
Primer Software (Clarke and Gorley 2006). Invertebrate
assemblages were analyzed at the species-,
family- and order-level, using species abundance,
family abundance and order abundance data, respectively.
Use of both lower- and higher-order taxonomic
levels is recommended until an appropriate taxonomic
level, which is one that can detect changes, is
determined (Ammann et al. 1997; Warwick 1988;
Waite et al. 2004). The results of the species- and
family-level analysis were similar (i.e., the same
faunal groups differed between the same plot types
and plants). Therefore, only the species-level results
are presented along with our high taxonomic level,
order, which is often sufficient to detect large impacts
(Nijboer and Schmidt-Kloiber 2004). Environmental
variables were normalized, while the species and order
lists with counts were log(x ? 1) transformed and
relativized (proportion of total), with no other abundance
cut-offs, standardizations, or weighting used on
the data. A total of 60 Artemisia-dominated faunal
species within 10 orders, 54 Artemisia and native
plant-mix faunal species within 10 orders, 53 Chrysanthemum-
native mix faunal species within 11
orders, and 59 Chrysanthemum-dominated faunal
species within 12 orders were found and used for all
of the multivariate analyses. Euclidean distance
(environmental variables) and BrayñCurtis similarity
indices (faunal data) of the log(x ? 1) transformed
data were calculated to compare the environment and
fauna communities between plots, and to relate the
fauna to the environmental variables. Differences in
the environmental conditions and the invertebrate
community (species and order abundances) within plot
types (between plant species) and between plot types
were visualized using nonmetric multidimensional
scaling (MDS) on the normalized environmental data
and the BrayñCurtis similarity indices of log(x ? 1)
transformed faunal data to reduce the dominant
contributions of abundant species (Clarke 1993;
Clarke and Gorley 2006). Six different random
starting points with up to 1,000 steps were used. The
stress values from the six runs were examined for
stability to determine whether a global solution had
been found. Only analyses with stress values of\0.2
were used; stress is a measure of how well the solution (in this case the 2-D MDS plots) represents the
multidimensional distances between the data. Clarke
(1993) suggests values\0.1 are good and\0.2 are
useful.
Significance testing for differences in environmental
conditions and faunal composition (species and
order abundances) between plot types and between
plant species found in each plot type was performed
using an analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) procedure
on the Euclidean distance and Bray Curtis similarity
matrices. This is a randomized permutation test based
on rank similarities of samples (Clarke 1993). Analyses
of dissimilarities in environmental conditions and
faunal composition found between plot types and plant
species, and the particular variables or taxa contributing
to the dissimilarity, were carried out using
SIMPER (Clarke 1993). The SIMPER results specify
which variables or taxa are responsible for the
ANOSIM results by comparing the average environmental
value or abundances of each taxon between
each plot type. The average dissimilarity between
samples from the four plot types (Artemisia dominated,
native plant mix, Chrysanthemum-native plant
mix, and Chrysanthemum dominated) is computed and
then broken down into contributions from each
variable/taxon. Those variables or taxa with high
average terms relative to the standard deviation are
important in the differentiation of environmental
conditions and faunal assemblages within each plot
type.
Relationships between the environmental variables
and both species diversity and total abundance were
tested with forward, stepwise multiple regressions using
JMP Statistical Software. Variables included in the
model met the criteria of p B 0.05 and r2 C 0.04. Tests
of the environmental variables that best explain faunal
community differenceswere conducted using the Brayñ
Curtis similarity indices with the BEST Analysis in
Primer Software using the BVSTEP method (criteria:
q[0.95, Dq\0.001) with fixed starting variables and
a Euclidean distance resemblance measure. BVSTEP
sequentially adds environmental variables, keeping
those that best explain faunal community patterns and
eliminating those that explain least. Several iterations of
the test are run with a random selection of variables to
ensure that the bestmatch is found (Clarke 1993; Clarke
andWarwick 2001). The environmental variables tested
are listed in Table 2.


xresults
Chrysanthemum effects on the physical
environment
Plot type environments
The environmental conditions in the invaded plots
differed from the uninvaded plots (Fig. 2a; Table 2A,
B). The invaded plots (Chrysanthemum dominated,
Chrysanthemum-native mix) contained smaller volumes
of the various native plants and greater volumes
of Chrysanthemum, higher relative substrate temperature
(Chrysanthemum dominated only), less light
attenuation (shading), and lower total plant biomass
(lower%cover and less total plant volume), but higher
relative humidity beneath the canopy (likely higher
substrate moisture evaporation rates) than in uninvaded
plots (Artemisia dominated, Artemisia-native mix)
(SIMPER-factors explaining *70 % of pairwise plot
differences). The environments in the Chrysanthemum-
dominated plots differed from the Chrysanthemum-
native mix plots (Table 2B; Fig. 2a) in similar
ways except total percent plant cover was lower in the
Chrysanthemum-native mix than Chrysanthemumdominated
plots (SIMPER-factors explaining
*70 % of pairwise plot differences; Table 2A).
Environments associated with plants within plots
The plant species contributing most to the different
environmental conditions between and within plots
were Artemisia and Eriogonum (Table 3), which were
both associated with greater plant cover and/or
volume, more light attenuation, higher relative humidity,
and lower relative temperatures than Chrysanthemum
(SIMPER-factors explaining*70 % of pairwise
differences). When Artemisia shrubs were dominant
(i.e., in the Artemisia dominated plots), the environmental
conditions were distinct from those of the other
native shrubs (Table 3) in that the dominant Artemisia
shrubs were generally larger (greater volume, percent
cover and height), attenuated more light, and had
lower relative temperatures and higher relative humidity
under the canopy (SIMPER, factors explaining
*70 % of differences between Artemisia shrubs in
Artemisia-dominated plots and native shrubs in the
same and other plots).
Similarly, Chrysanthemum plants in the Chrysanthmum-
dominated plots were associated with different
environmental conditions than Chrysanthemum plants
in mixed plots (Table 3). The Chrysanthemum plants
in monoculture had more biomass (taller, more percent
cover), and were associated with lower relative
temperatures, higher humidity and more light attenuation
than Chrysanthemum growing with natives
(SIMPER, factors explaining *70 % of the environmental
differences between Chrysanthmeum in monocultures
compared with those in mixed plots.)
Canopy invertebrate diversity and abundance
Differences in total invertebrate abundance and
diversity between plot types were mostly driven by
the plant species present, namely Artemisia and
Chrysanthemum. Total invertebrate abundance tended
to be highest in the Artemisia-dominant plots, intermediate
in native-mix and Chrysanthemum-dominated
plots, and lowest in the invaded mixed plots.
Artemisia and Chrysanthemum tended to drive this
trend with support of the highest invertebrate abundances
(Table 4). Number of species per plant was
highest on Artemisia and Chrysanthemum and lowest
on the other native plants, while measures of diversity
and evenness, H0, did not differ among plot types or
plant species (Table 4).
Community composition
Faunal compositions of plots
Invertebrate species compositions (species abundance
data) of plots invaded by Chrysanthemum (Chrysanthemum-
dominated and Chrysanthemum-native mix)
were 63ñ76 % different than uninvaded plots (Artemisia-
dominated, Artemisia-native mix) (Table 5A;
Fig. 2b). Composition was similar between the two
invaded plot types (Chrysanthemum dominated vs
Chrysanthemum-native mix, ANOSIM P = 0.78),
and between the two uninvaded plot types (Artemisia-
dominated vs Artemisia-native mix, ANOSIM
P = 0.19) (Table 5A; Fig. 2b). Further, composition
did not differ across plot locations (ANOSIM
P = 0.43). Uninvaded plots had higher abundances
of hemipterans (mostly psyllids and cicadellids),
thysanopterans, western tussock moth caterpillars,
mites and dictynid spiders, while the invaded plots had higher abundances of dipterans (dolichopodids, tabanids),
wasps, flower beetles (Dasytinae and Phalacridae),
and nymphs of one type of deltocephalin
hemipteran (SIMPER, taxa that account for *50 %
of dissimilarity between plots; Online Resource 1).
Invertebrate order composition (order abundance
data) revealed similar but simplified patterns (Fig. 2c).
Order composition was similar between the two
uninvaded (Artemisia-dominated and Artemisia-native
mix) and the two invaded (Chrysanthemum dominated and Chrysanthemum-native mix) plot types (ANOSIM
P = 0.60 for both), and differed by 62ñ75 % between
invaded and uninvaded plots (Table 5B; Fig. 2c).
Uninvaded plots tended to have higher abundances of
mites and hemipterans, while invaded plots had more
dipterans, coleopterans and hymenopterans (SIMPER,
taxa that account for *75 % of dissimilarity between
plots; Online Resource 1).
Faunal community compositions on plants within plot
types
Chrysanthemum presence influenced which fauna
were found on the native plant species within invaded
plots and therefore drove many of the differences in
the invaded and uninvaded plot communities. This is
evidenced by comparisons among the faunal communities on Chrysanthemum plants, on native
plants in invaded plots, and on native plants in
uninvaded plots.
Native plant versus Chrysanthemum faunal
communities
The invertebrate communities living on Chrysanthemum
were more similar to the communities living on
native plants within invaded plots (those in the
Chrysanthemum-native mix) than to those fauna on
native plants in uninvaded plots (Artemisia dominated,
Artemisia-native mix; Table 6A, B; Fig. 2b, c). Similarities
between Chrysanthemum-associated fauna
and the fauna on native-plants within the invaded
plots were due to the Chrysanthemum-associated
fauna (e.g., dipterans, wasps, flower beetles) using
the natives, with little or no increase of native plant
associated fauna (e.g., hemipterans, thysanopterans,
tussock moth caterpillars) on the Chrysanthemum
(SIMPER results for both species- and order-level
analyses; Fig. 2b, c; Online Resource 1). The close
proximity of native and Chrysanthemum plants in the
Chrysanthemum-native mix plots could contribute to similar invertebrate compositions, but the communities
living on native plants within the same plots
(natives within Artemisia-native mix, Chrysanthemum-
native mix) often significantly differed
(Table 6A, B; Online Resource 1) revealing the ability
of invertebrates to differentiate plants within plots.
The invertebrate communities living on Chrysanthemum
plants differed from those living on native
plants in the uninvaded plots in the same way that the
invaded whole-plot communities differed from the
uninvaded ones illustrating that when Chrysanthemum
is present, the plot-wide community is influenced.
Chrysanthemum plants had higher abundances of
dipterans, wasps, flower beetles (Dasytinae, Phalacridae),
Deltocephalinae nymphs, and the Mediterranean
snail, Theba paisana. Each of the uninvaded native
plant species hosted more hemipterans, thysanopterans,
the minute brown scavenger beetle (Latrididae),
western tussock moth caterpillars, mites, and dictinyd
spiders (SIMPER, species accounting for*50 %, and
orders accounting for*75 %of dissimilarity between
Chrysanthemum fauna and the fauna on each uninvaded
native plant species; Online Resource 1).
Invaded versus uninvaded native plant faunal
communities
The native plants in invaded plots hosted Chrysanthemum-
associated fauna while those in uninvaded plots
did not (Fig. 2). Invertebrate communities on Artemisia
plants were similar between the uninvaded plots
(Artemisia-dominated, Artemisia-native mix), but differed
by 59ñ63 % for species and 47ñ49 % for orders
between the Artemisia in uninvaded (Artemisia-dominated,
Artemisia-native mix) and in invaded (Chrysanthemum-
native mix) plots (Table 6A, B; Fig. 2b,
c). The community on invaded Artemisia (in Chrysanthemum-
native mix plots) contained more Chrysanthemum-
associated individuals (e.g.,
Deltocephalinae nymphs, flower beetles, dolichopodid
and tabanid flies), and less native plant-associated
fauna (e.g., western tussock moth caterpillars, thysanopterans,
hemipterans, mites, and dictinyd spiders)
than in the community on uninvaded Artemisia
(Artemisia-dominated, Artemisia-native mix) (SIMPER,
taxa accounting for *50 % of dissimilarity in
species and*75 % of dissimilarity in orders between
uninvaded and invaded Artemisia fauna; Online
Resource 1). Similar differences were observed for
the other native plants (Eriogonum, Isocoma) in
invaded compared with uninvaded plots, but results
were not significant at a = 0.05 (Table 6A, B; Online
Resource 1). It is likely that there were too few
individuals of these other native plant species to see
significant effects. Therefore, most of the differences
in communities across plot types were due to the
animals living directly on Chrysanthemum and those
that switched to Artemisia (and maybe other natives),
when present.
Effect of physical environment on invertebrate
community
Percent canopy cover and relative temperature were
positively associated with total faunal abundance and
species richness per plant (Table 7). The differences in
faunal communities across plot types were associated
with the differences in light attenuation, and the
volumes of Chrysanthemum and Artemisia in each plot
(species level: BEST R = 0.58, order level: BEST
R = 0.62; Table 2A). Differences in faunal communities
within plots (between plant species) were due
primarily to the differential light attenuation afforded
the various plant species (species level BEST
R = 0.24, order level BEST R = 0.23), which tended
to be lowest beneath Chrysanthemum, greatest under
large Artemisia, and intermediate under other natives. 

xdiscussion
Effects of Chrysanthemum on the coastal sage
scrub invertebrate community
The presence of invasive Chrysanthemum in this site
was associated with faunal communities and physical
conditions different than those found in the native
plant assemblages. The cause of these communitylevel
and physical differences may be rooted in the
unique biological, physical and chemical characteristics
of the Chrysanthemum plants compared to the
native plants in this area. Chrysanthemum is an annual
plant, which generally has less primary producer
biomass in space and time than perennial shrubs like
the dominant natives in this site. These generalized
differences between plants with annual and perennial
life cycles were supported by the smaller, less
complex aboveground stature, and the relatively sparse cover of stands of Chrysanthemum compared
with the native shrubs. The differences between
Chrysanthemum and the native plants likely translated
to the differences in associated physical properties
(less shading, higher substrate temperatures; e.g.,
Williamson and Fitter 1996; Smith and Knapp
2001), which, in turn, influenced the associated
invertebrate communities (Pearson 2009; Holmquist
et al. 2011; Talley et al. 2012). The invasion of
Chrysanthemum also likely changes the quantity and
types of food available. Because of its annual life
cycle, Chrysanthemum live biomass is only present
throughout the late winter to spring with standing and
fallen dead litter available for the rest of the year. This
may have in part contributed to the lower abundances
and diversity of largely herbivorous taxa such as
hemipterans and thysanopterans (Schoonhoven et al.
2006) on Chrysanthemum and invaded native plants.
Further, the large, abundant composite flowers likely
attracted fauna not normally attracted to the area, such
as pollinating beetles and flies (Woods et al. 2012; Van
Kleunen et al. 2007). Only Encelia has a relatively
similar flower, though is is not often found in such high
densities in this area. The unique chemical composition
of Chrysanthemum may have served as an
attractant and/or repellent, and likely reduced the
quality of foodóany of which would contribute to
shifts in the invertebrate community (Jimenez et al.
2012). Chrysanthemum contains an insecticidal class
of chemicals collectively known as pyrethrins (Marongiu
et al. 2009), which may have contributed to the
lower abundances of plant-sucking insects, such as the
herbivorous hemipterans and thyanopterans. This
situation of an invader with different life history
strategies than the natives is not unique to this site
(DiTomaso 2000), making it likely that similar
patterns and processes may be present in other
locations and other ecosystems.
Broader effects of Chrysanthemum
The shifts in physical conditions and faunal communities
associated with the presence of Chrysanthemum
have implications for ecosystem functioning. The
change in plant architecture can affect the quantity and
quality of habitat for some species (e.g., Dennis et al.
1998; Pearson 2009). Increased substrate surface
temperatures and higher rates of moisture loss as
observed in association with Chrysanthemum in this
study can decrease decomposition rates (Swift et al.
1979). Chrysanthemum-associated shifts in invertebrate
composition can also affect ecosystem functioning
since invertebrates play diverse and relatively
large roles in ecosystem processes (Triplehorn and
Johnson 2005). Canopy arthropods can influence
decomposition and nutrient turnover (e.g., moths,
hemipterans, Schowalter et al. 1991), pollination (e.g.,
Dasytinae beetle, dolichopodid flies; Mawdsley 2003;
Pollet et al. 2004), and food web support through
connecting basal and upper trophic levels (e.g.,
hemipterans, dipterans and spiders, Gratton and Denno
2006).
In particular, the Chrysanthemum canopy hosted
the invasive Mediterranean snail, Theba paisana, an
intensively-grazing agricultural pest that uses vertical
structures such as live or dead plants, or fence posts, to
aestivate (Baker and Hawke 1990). Further, the
increase in dipteran and beetle pollinators associated
with Chrysanthemum could encourage the further
spread of Chrysanthemum and other plants with
similar flower type and phenology (e.g., Morales and
Aizen 2002). For example, Encelia is native and has weedy tendencies in this immediate area so could
benefit from increased local abundances of pollinators.
The invasion of Chrysanthemum may also negatively
impact species that rely on coastal sage shrubs,
such as the California gnatcatcher, a federally listed
endangered species (Polioptila californica) that was
listed due to the loss of 75ñ90 % of its coastal sage
scrub habitat (Atwood and Bontrager 2001). Direct
effects of Chrysanthemum on the gnatcatcher include
displacing the coastal sage scrub shrubs in which it
nests (Mock 2004). Chrysanthemum and other invasive
annuals can outcompete perennial natives in the
presence of elevated nitrogen (e.g., runoff, pollution;
Hauser 2006) or after disturbance when the fecund,
fast growing annuals quickly establish and monopolize
moisture, nutrients and sunlight thereby limiting
establishment of young perennials (Bell et al. 2003;
Corbin and DíAntonio 2004; Speziale and Ezcurra
2011). Chrysanthemum may indirectly affect the
gnatcatcher through changes in prey availability. The
primary prey of the gnatcatcher is hemipterans (especially
cicadellids) and spiders (Burger et al. 1999),
both of which were 60ñ80 % less abundant in invaded
than uninvaded plots.
Conservation implications
Taxonomic resolution as a metric
Sincewe foundsmall effects ofChrysanthemumon total
faunal abundance and diversity we reiterate the value of
considering a range metrics, including those reflecting
diversity, abundance, the functional roles of species,
taxonomic compositions, and taxonomic hierarchy to
assess the impacts of invasions or other disturbances.
Fine-scale taxonomic resolution (e.g., genus or species)
provides detection of relatively weak effects since
individual species responses to disturbance may vary,
and grouping taxa may average out these responses
(Lenat andResh 2001) or reveal only the response of the
numerically dominant species (Wu 1982). Coarse-scale
taxonomic resolutionmay be appropriatewhen there are
similar responses to the disturbance among the species
within a group, which would reveal no new information
about the effects of disturbance (Olsgard and Somerfield
2000). A mix of fine- and coarse-scale taxonomic
analyses may be most insightful (Waite et al. 2004), at
least until evaluations of the more appropriate taxonomic
level can be made (Ammann et al. 1997).
In this study, the relationships between Chrysanthemum
and the faunal community were similar at the
species-, family- and order-levels. Similarity between
species- and family-levels may be because we mostly
found only one or two representative species within
each family. Similarity between the species- (or
family-) and order-levels indicated that the species
within each order shared similar responses to Chrysanthemum.
Similar responses, or ëëredundancyíí,
come about when species have similar requirements
and/or responses to a particular disturbance (Olsgard
and Somerfield 2000). The response of a species to
disturbance is influenced by the speciesí traits (e.g.,
physiological tolerances, nutritional requirements)
and the type and magnitude of disturbance (White
and Jentsch 2001). The orders found in this study were
generally functionally diverse (e.g., spiders, coleopterans,
dipterans, hymenoptera; Triplehorn and Johnson
2005; Schowalter 2011) signifying that the
disturbances caused by Chrysanthemum, namely the
alteration of basic physical properties and resources,
was large enough to affect the fauna at the order level.
It may be that rapid assessments of the effects of novel
invaders like Chrysanthemum, which dramatically
alter the environment and limiting resources for all
species, can be made using higher taxonomic groupings
(Nijboer and Schmidt-Kloiber 2004), but further
assessments of the taxonomic level(s) needed to assess
effects of Chrysanthemum in a wider range of
locations and/or over larger scales are needed first
(Resh and McElravy 1993). The use of both coarse and
fine taxonomic levels when feasible, however, is the
ideal approach to assess the magnitude and breadth of
effects of a disturbance (Waite et al. 2004).
Management strategy
This study revealed the potential roles of the common
coastal sage scrub plants in hosting invertebrate
communities and influencing environmental conditions.
Artemisia and, to a lesser extent, Eriogonum
contributed much to invertebrate abundance and
diversity, as well as mitigating harsh physical conditions.
Chrysanthemum was also associated with high
invertebrate diversity suggesting that, in low abundances,
it could contribute to biodiversity and functioning
of these systems (e.g., Gleditsch and Carlo
2011). However, even partial invasion of Chrysanthemum
into plots increased physical stress and altered the invertebrate community of nearby native plants.
These effects, coupled with its invasive tendencies and
its association with at least one invasive invertebrate,
the Mediterranean snail, lead us to recommend that
management efforts focus on prevention of spread of
Chrysanthemum and, for areas where invasion has
occurred, early removal. The seedbank of Chrysanthemum
is abundant and can be persistent (Bastida
et al. 2010), therefore, we recommend planting the
often dispersal-limited native species (Morzaria-Luna
and Zedler 2007) after a disturbance to maintain the
coastal sage scrub invertebrate community structure,
and to limit the reinvasion of Chrysanthemum or new
invasion of one of the other plethora of invasive plants
threatening this ecosystem (e.g., Morzaria-Luna and
Zedler 2007).
Future directions
Further study of the effects of Chrysanthemum on this
community should include effects on substrate conditions
including soil properties, nutrient cycling,
decomposition rates, physical conditions, and the
ground-dwelling invertebrate community. Additionally,
examination of effects throughout the year, in
addition to within the growing season, and over larger
spatial scales may reveal a more complete picture of
the relationship between this invader and these
dwindling coastal sage scrub ecosystems. A chemical
analysis of the insecticidal properties of Chrysanthemum
on various functional groups of invertebrates
(e.g., plant-suckers, pollinators, detritivores, and predators)
would also be helpful in predicting and
modeling the effects of Chrysanthemum invasion on
coastal sage scrub communities in the future.