xabstract
1. The effect of a newly introduced population of signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) on a riverine invertebrate community in the River Clyde, Scotland, is examined. Five hypotheses related to crayfish impact on the invertebrate community are tested by comparing sites containing signal crayfish with similar sites in the same river which have not yet been colonized.2. The hypothesis that crayfish significantly reduce the total numbers of invertebrates in the community was supported by this study, with invertebrate density in areas containing signal crayfish around 60% of that with no observed crayfish.3. The hypothesis that crayfish presence affects some groups more than others was also supported. Plecoptera, Chironomidae, Diptera and Hirudinea, in particular, showed evidence of reduced species numbers in areas containing crayfish, and Plecoptera, Hirudinea, Tricladida and Hydracarina showed evidence of reduced densities. Community diversity and richness was also lower at sites containing crayfish.4. Neither the hypothesis that overall invertebrate biomass would be lower at sites with crayfish present nor the hypothesis that individual invertebrate size would be lower at sites with crayfish was supported.5. Overall the study indicates that introduced signal crayfish can significantly and fundamentally modify fluvial macroinvertebrate community structure.

xintroduction
Crayfish (Astacoidea) are not native to Scotland, although there are two species which have established populations there. The white-clawed crayfish (Austropotamobius pallipes), which is native to the other parts of the UK, has become established in a lake in Sutherland and in a former reservoir in the Clyde catchment (Thomas, 1992; Maitland and Adams, 2001; Maitland et al., 2001). Both of these populations were apparently established some considerable time ago; neither shows evidence of dispersing to neighbouring waters and populations appear to be stable. The other introduced species is the signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus). This species is native to north-western North America but was first introduced to Europe (Sweden) in the 1960s (Maitland et al., 2001) to supplement stocks affected by crayfish plague (Holdich and Rogers, 1999).The signal crayfish was also introduced to Scotland as a potential aquaculture species. Displaying a pattern similar to that seen in England, signal crayfish, through presumptive farm escapes, deliberate releases and natural dispersal (Sinclair and Ribbens, 2000), have established a number of populations in the wild in waters in at least 10 localities spread throughout Scotland and including an island site (Arran) (Maitland et al., 2001).The potential impact of non-native freshwater species invading habitats where they were previously absent has been widely discussed elsewhere (Adams, 1996; Adams and Maitland, 1998). In general, effects can be categorized as: modification of habitats by invading species, competition with native species, hybridization with native species, concomitant disease or parasite introduction, and predation upon native species.There is evidence that introduced signal crayfish can establish very dense populations in the UK (Trudgill, 2000) and that at high density they significantly modify habitats in rivers as a result of their burrowing behaviour (Dorn and Mittlebach, 1999) which can result in habitat degradation (Maitland et al., 2001). There is also the likelihood that, at least at high densities, their foraging behaviour may affect populations of native species. Signal crayfish are highly polytrophic, having been shown to feed on plant material, detritus, zoobenthos, fish, and other crayfish (Goddard, 1988; Hogger, 1988; Momot, 1995; Guan and Wiles, 1998). This pattern of foraging highlights a potential for introduced signal crayfish that establish large populations to have significant impact on a broad range of flora and fauna.This paper examines the impact of one potential effect } the possible influence of introduced signal crayfish on the native macro-invertebrate community } at one fluvial site where they have recently established a new population. Five main hypotheses were tested:1. The presence of crayfish will significantly reduce the total number of invertebrates.2. The impact of crayfish will be greater on some taxa than others, resulting in reduced communityrichness.3. Invertebrate community diversity will be lower at sites containing crayfish.4. The average size of invertebrates will be reduced in the presence of crayfish.5. Overall mean invertebrate biomass will be lower at sites containing crayfish.

xmethods
Study areaFollowing the discovery of two live and four dead signal crayfish in October 1999 in the headwaters of the River Clyde in South Lanarkshire, Scotland (SEPA, 1999a), further surveys confirmed the presence of a localized but well-established breeding population, probably originating from an unsuccessful aquaculture venture (SEPA, 1999b). Signal crayfish have probably been present in the Clyde since at least 1992, and by 2002 the population extended over at least 4.2 km of the river (Trudgill, 2000; Mitchell, pers. comm.).The area of the Clyde supporting the crayfish population is in the upper Clyde catchment near the village of Elvanfoot, South Lanarkshire, Scotland. The affected reach flows over boulder clay at an altitude of some 270 m above sea level. Although the solid geology of the area is predominantly acidic, the river water is usually slightly alkaline and the shallow gradient has allowed the formation of a floodplain. The upper Clyde is a spate river, and the crayfish have become established in an area of active channel migration (with associated oxbow lake formation). Water quality is generally good and there are extensive beds of macrophytes (predominantly Ranunculus sp.)Fifteen sampling sites were selected along the River Clyde, six in areas that contained crayfish. Three sites were situated downstream of the crayfish range and six upstream of it (three in each of two tributaries). All sites chosen for sampling had similar physical characteristics.The maximum distance between the furthest upstream and downstream sites was ca 12 km. Water quality is not thought to have varied between the sites over the sampling period. Five replicate Surber samples were taken in areas of moderately fast flow (0.15 to 0.4 m s 1 at the time of sampling), where the substratum was predominantly of pebbles (particle size predominantly 5–15cm along the longest axis). Constant substratum size was the dominant factor in site selection.Field and laboratory methodsFive quantitative samples of benthic macro-invertebrates, covering the full width of the river, were taken at each of the 15 sampling sites using a Surber sampler (20   20 cm, ca 2 mm mesh size). The substratum was disturbed to a depth of around 100 mm for 30 s and captured invertebrates were transferred to a solution of 70% alcohol. Crayfish presence/absence and relative density data were derived from a trapping scheme run by local volunteers. Between 70 and 120 baited Swedish ‘Trappies’ were set throughout the study area where crayfish are known to be present and where they were absent.Invertebrates were sorted and counted under a dissection microscope. To determine biomass, all individuals of each taxon were also weighed (to 0.00001 g) and specimens identified to various taxonomic levels, but individuals being allocated to nominal species within that taxon (species a, b, c etc.) on the basis of similarity (Mellanby, 1938; Needham and Needham, 1938; Macan and Cooper, 1949; Mann and Watson, 1954; Hynes, 1967; Macan, 1970; Croft, 1986). All samples were treated identically. Although detailed catch records were not kept, it was possible to identify sites semi-subjectively as having no crayfish catches, low catch rates, moderate catch rates or high catch rates on the basis of recent trapping operations. For the purpose of this study, crayfish were assumed to be absent from areas where they had not been caught in traps. For other sites, their density was approximated on a scale of 1 to 10 (with low density 1⁄4 1; moderate density 1⁄4 5; high density 1⁄4 10), based on catches from traps at each site being operated as part of the control programme. In the absence of quantitative population estimates, this approach was designed to enable a comparison of sites where crayfish were absent and those where they were present, and also to allow any incremental effects of density to be examined.Data analysisFor each sampling site, the mean number of invertebrate taxa present per sample, the mean number and weight of invertebrates present, and the mean weight of individual animals was calculated. For the more common taxa, the mean abundance of individuals in each was also calculated to look for specific effects on particular invertebrate groups. For effects on community richness, the sample mean number of species recorded at each site was used as an index of richness. To examine effects on community diversity, the Shannon–Wiener index was calculated separately for each site. Sites with and without signal crayfish were compared using t-tests; population and community effects with increasing crayfish density were analysed by means of a Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient.

xresults
Sites without crayfish had a higher mean number of invertebrates than those sites with crayfish (p 1⁄4 0:019) (Figure 1). However, there was no correlation between crayfish density and average total number of invertebrates (Figure 2). The mean number of species per site was significantly higher at sites where there were no crayfish compared with those which contained crayfish (p50.001) (Figure 3). In addition there was a strong correlation between crayfish density and mean site species richness (p 1⁄4 0:0002) (Figure 4). The mean Shannon–Wiener index of diversity was higher for sites with no crayfish than for sites with crayfish (p50.001) (Figure 5). However, there was no significant correlation between crayfish density and the Shannon–Wiener index (Figure 6).The mean individual invertebrate weight was higher at sites with crayfish (4.5 1.7mg) (mean SD) than without crayfish (3.1   3.6 mg); however, this difference was marginally not significant (p 1⁄4 0:067). There was a strong positive correlation between mean individual invertebrate weight and crayfish density (p50.05) (Figure 7) indicating that the size of individual invertebrates increased with increasing crayfish density, from approximately 3.2mg where crayfish were absent, to approximately 6.1mg at the highest density. The mean total biomass of invertebrates did not differ between sites with crayfish present and crayfish absent (p 1⁄4 0:868). There was also no correlation between crayfish density and mean biomass at each site (Figure 8).No representatives of Hirudinea or Tricladida were found at sites containing crayfish, whereas a mean of 1.3 and 0.5 individuals per 0.04 m2 respectively were recorded at sites without crayfish (Tables 1 and 2). Nine taxa showed a reduced number of species present with four of these (Plecoptera, Chironomidae, Crustacea and Hydracarina) showing statistically significant reductions (Table 1). In addition, nine other taxa showed higher numbers of individuals at sites without crayfish than those with crayfish, and for two of these (Plecoptera and Hydracarina) this difference was significant (Table 2).

xdiscussion
This study relies upon information from a volunteer-run trapping programme to determine the relative density of crayfish at each study site. One assumption made here is that where no crayfish have been recorded, they are absent from that site. As crayfish may not be captured in traps when at very low densities, it is possible that some sites designated as lacking crayfish in this study may have simply a very low density. In addition, in the absence of robust quantitative density data, a semi-subjective index of crayfish density has been adopted to enable any incremental effects of crayfish density to be detected. This density index reflects the scale of the catch rate at trapping sites by the trap operators.The hypothesis that the total number of invertebrates would be significantly lower in areas where crayfish were present was supported by this study. Invertebrates are the main food source for signal crayfish (Guan and Wiles, 1998; Nystro ̈ m et al., 1999). Studies on other crayfish species, such as Orconectes virilis, also showed preferential predation of invertebrates (Hanson et al., 1990). Although this study compared invertebrate communities between different sites, the study sites were chosen for the similarity of their physical characteristics. It is therefore likely that the mechanism causing the decrease in invertebrate abundance recorded in this study is predation by crayfish.A second hypothesis, that the total biomass of invertebrates would be lower in areas where crayfish were present, was not supported. This contrasts with studies by Nystro ̈ m et al. (1996, 1999) which found that the total biomass of invertebrates decreased with increasing crayfish abundance.Also not supported by this study was the hypothesis that the size of invertebrates would be smaller in areas inhabited by crayfish. One possibility is that crayfish depress the overall number of invertebrates present but subsequent reduced population size results in a growth response by remaining individuals so that they increase in size. Hanson et al. (1990) observed, however, that larger and more mobile invertebrates could avoid crayfish predation, although larger invertebrate prey provide a higher energetic gain for crayfish.A working hypothesis that community richness would be lower in areas containing crayfish than areas without was supported. The number of taxa present was significantly higher in areas where crayfish were absent, indicating a selective effect of crayfish on certain invertebrate species. Selective foraging by crayfish has been shown in a number of studies (Holdich and Reeve, 1988; Hanson et al., 1990; Momot, 1995; Guan and Wiles, 1998).The Plecoptera was the group most affected by the presence of crayfish, the numbers being significantly lower in crayfish-inhabited areas compared with uninhabited sites. Plecopteran nymphs are not good swimmers and mainly crawl over the substrate, although not very efficiently (Mellanby, 1938). This lack of mobility means that they are particularly vulnerable to predation. Other studies suggest that mobile taxa survive better in areas where crayfish are abundant (Nystro ̈ m et al., 1996, 1999). Individuals from the genus Leuctra were most abundant where crayfish were present. Leuctrids can burrow and are often found under stones and this genus may be able to reduce their predation risk from crayfish (Mellanby, 1938). In addition to reduced Plecoptera, the abundance of Hydracarina was significantly lower in areas where crayfish were present. There were no individuals of Tricladida or Hirudinea found in areas inhabited by crayfish, suggesting that these invertebrate taxa are also particularly vulnerable to predation by crayfish.The presence of crayfish had a significant negative effect on the abundance of chironomids present in this study. Guan and Wiles (1998) found that chironomid larvae were the most numerous prey for crayfish, indicating that their reduction in the present study may be due to crayfish predation. However, Nystro ̈ m et al. (1999) found that chironomids dominated in ponds where crayfish were abundant. This difference may be because studies by Nystro ̈ m et al. (1996) were conducted in artificial ponds rather than a natural river system. Differences in habitat may affect crayfish behaviour, and the species composition of invertebrates may differ between habitats. Riverine chironomids may also be more vulnerable to crayfish predation than those in ponds. Also, the experimental ponds may have contained other prey items, which were selected preferentially by crayfish, but which are not present in river systems.A number of invertebrate groups showed no significant effect of crayfish on population size. For example, the presence of crayfish had no effect on the total abundance of molluscs, a finding that contrasts with other studies where molluscs tend to be the preferred food source for crayfish (Hanson et al., 1990; Momot, 1995). This may be because this study site was not particularly suitable for molluscs. The dominant mollusc species was the river limpet, Ancylus fluviatilis, which is likely to be particularly difficult for crayfish to remove from the stones to which they attach. It may be energetically more attractive for crayfish to concentrate on more readily obtainable prey items.Other invertebrate groups which showed no difference in abundance between crayfish present and absent sites include Trichoptera, Crustacea, and Coleoptera larvae. Ephemeroptera were apparently not affected by the presence of crayfish. Many species (e.g. Ecdyonurus spp.) are adapted to life in strong currents, with flattened bodies and a habit of clinging to rock surfaces, which may allow them to evade crayfish (Mellanby, 1938). Ecdyonurus spp. also tend to be relatively large and robust, making them a difficult foodstuff for crayfish to handle. Ba ̈etis spp. (smaller, swimming nymphs) also occurred together with crayfish; their ability to swim may decrease their chance of capture.Counter-intuitively, at least one group } the Diptera (excluding chironomids) } showed evidence of increased abundance in the presence of crayfish. Habitat use may allow this group to avoid crayfish predation. For example, the genus Tipula (the commonest group in areas where crayfish were present) are commonly found in mud and under stones (Mellanby, 1938) where they are likely to be safe from predation. Other studies have noted that sediment-dwelling taxa can dominate in waters inhabited by crayfish (Nystro ̈ m et al., 1996, 1999).Species richness for some taxonomic groups was affected by the presence of crayfish. For Plecoptera, Crustacea, Hydracarina, Hirudinea and Tricladida, the number of species recorded at sites where crayfish were present was lower than at sites with no crayfish. The cumulative effect of crayfish presence on the invertebrate community was a reduction in both diversity and richness, thus supporting our working hypothesis. However, although the mean number of invertebrates was lower at crayfish sites, the total invertebrate biomass was not. This effect probably resulted from the increased mean size of individual invertebrates at sites with crayfish compared with sites where they were absent.This study has shown that the introduction and establishment of signal crayfish to streams and rivers can have a significant impact on the native freshwater invertebrate community. The work was carried out in habitats dominated by relatively fast-flowing water, with low macrophyte density, diverse macro- invertebrate communities and with salmonids dominating the fish community. Where signal crayfish becomes established at sites with similar physical and biotic characteristics we predict that invertebrate numbers and community diversity will decline. However, in addition to these direct presumptive predation effects it is possible that there may be indirect effects on other parts of the aquatic community. For example, the habitats examined are used as nursery areas by juvenile salmonids. In early life, these fish are highly limited in the prey size they can consume. Changes in the size structure of the invertebrate community, and the fact that a significant proportion of the available energy in the system could be incorporated in the crayfish populations, may significantly reduce prey availability for salmonids and other species limited by prey size.
