xabstract Using bioengineering techniques to restore areas invaded by Fallopia japonica shows promising results.
Planting tree cuttings could allow both rapidly re-establishing a competitive native plant community and
reducing F. japonica performance. However, F. japonica has been shown to affect native plant species
through different mechanisms such as allelopathy. This article investigates the phytotoxic effect of
F. japonica on the resprouting capacity and the growth of three Salicaceae species with potential value for
restoration. An experimental design which physically separates donor pots containing either an individual
from F. japonica or bare soil from target pots containing cuttings of Populus nigra, Salix atrocinerea
or Salix viminali was used. Leachates from donor pots were used to water target pots. The effects of
leachates were evaluated by measuring the final biomass of the cuttings. F. japonica leachates inhibited
the growth of cuttings, and this effect is linked to the emission of polyphenol compounds by F. japonica.
Leachates also induced changes in soil nitrogen composition. These results suggest the existence of
allelopathic effects, direct and/or indirect, of F. japonica on the growth of Salicaceae species cuttings.
However, the three species were not equally affected, suggesting that the choice of resistant species
could be crucial for restoration success. 


xintroduction


 Biological invasions are considered as one of the global changes
threatening biodiversity worldwide (Thuiller, 2007). Nevertheless,
only a small portion of introduced plants spread extensively and
become invasive in their new range (Hayes and Barry, 2008;
Williamson, 1993). The search for the mechanisms explaining the
success of invasive species raises a great deal of interest among the
scientific and management communities as better identification of
these processes is crucially needed to design appropriate management
actions to limit their impacts and their spread.
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the success of
invasive plants. Some successful exotic plants have intrinsic characteristics
such as a high resource uptake and use efficiency associated
with a high growth rate, allowing them to take advantage in
resource-rich environments (Blossey and Notzold, 1995; Davis
et al., 2000; Elton, 1958). Moreover, in the invaded environment
competition for resources could be influenced by additive mechanisms
favouring the introduced species. For example, the absence
of their natural enemies releases alien plants from trophic pressure
and gives them the opportunity to express their full competitive
potential (Elton, 1958; Keane and Crawley, 2002). Evidence is also
growing supporting the novel weapon hypothesis, which assumes
that some invasive plants produce allelochemicals to which native
species are naÔve and therefore particularly sensitive (Callaway and
Aschehoug, 2000; Hierro and Callaway, 2003). Allelopathy is the
mechanism of the novel weapon hypothesis which has also been
designated as the allelopathic advantage against resident species
(Callaway and Ridenour, 2004). Allelopathy is here considered as
only the negative effects, either direct or indirect, of one plant on
another through production of a compound or a group of compounds,
as Inderjit and Duke (2003) suggested and because it is a
commonly accepted definition in plant ecology (Abhilasha et al.,
2008; Callaway et al., 2008; Hierro and Callaway, 2003; Murrell
et al., 2011; Viard-CrÈtat et al., 2009).The role of allelopathy in invader superiority has been tested
successfully on different plant genera (Grove et al., 2013; Jarchow
and Cook, 2009; Sharma et al., 2005; Thorpe et al., 2009). Some
exotic species can affect the recruitment of native species through
the reduction of seed germination (Sharma et al., 2005) or affect
adult performance by reducing plant growth. For example, Thorpe
et al. (2009) showed that adding ()-catechins, which are produced
by the invasive Centaurea maculosa in the rhizosphere of target
plants, reduces the growth of species from the invaded range (USA)
but not of species from the native range (Romania). Interestingly,
reducing the allelopathic effect of the invasive Typha angustifolia in
the soil reverses the competitive outcome between T. angustifolia
and the native Bolboschoenus fluviatilis, demonstrating the importance
of allelopathy in the success of this exotic species (Jarchow
and Cook, 2009). Fallopia japonica [Houtt.] Ronse Decraene, or
Japanese knotweed, is considered as one of the worst invasive
plants in the world (Lowe et al., 2000). F. japonica has often been
observed to form dense and almost mono-specific stands (Aguilera
et al., 2010), leading to the conclusion that allelopathy may be an
explanation for its remarkable success. Some studies already suggest
a phytotoxic effect of F. japonica and its congeners (Fallopia
sachalinensis and Fallopia X bohemica) on native plants (Murrell
et al., 2011; Siemens and Blossey, 2007; Vrchotov· and Ser·,
2008) because of phytotoxic compounds (including anthraquinones
and other polyphenols) in their root leachates (Fan et al.,
2010; Meiffren et al., 2010; Vastano et al., 2000). This process
could play a major role in the invasion of Fallopia ssp. combined
with other factors such as resource pre-emption (Siemens and
Blossey, 2007) and modification of nutrient cycles (Dassonville
et al., 2011). This paper aims to investigate the allelopathic properties
of F. japonica and its effects on tree cuttings used in
restoration.
Initially imported from Asia during the 19th century for ornamentation,
F. japonica is now invasive in many ecosystems in
Europe and North America (Bailey, 2005). It affects ecosystems by
forming a dense canopy, reduces the floral (BÌmov· et al., 2004;
Maurel et al., 2010) and faunal (Gerber et al., 2008; Maerz et al.,
2005) biodiversity and modifies nutrient cycles (Dassonville et al.,
2011). This species is mostly found along riparian habitats, which
assume important ecological functions (Naiman et al., 1993), and
spreads mainly by a rapid clonal growth (BÌmov· et al., 2003; Pysek
et al., 2003; TiÈbrÈ et al., 2007). Regeneration from rhizome fragments
is very efficient as a few grams of rhizome are sufficient for
rapid production of a new stand (Brock and Wade, 1992; S·sik and
Eli·s, 2006). The high cost of eradicating F. japonica (e.g. estimated
costs linked with Asian knotweed management and impacts exceed
260 Million $US/year in the UK, Williams et al., 2010) compels
practitioners to find economical and efficient ways to restore ecosystems
(Crowhurst, 2006).
Various methods have been tested to control F. japonica. Herbicides
have shown their limitation (Bashtanova et al., 2009) and
are forbidden or not recommended along rivers where the herbicide
could leach into the water. Cutting and mowing are solutions
commonly used to eradicate or at least to reduce F. japonica vigour
in conservation areas, but they are labour-intensive and therefore
expensive (Delbart et al., 2012; Gerber et al., 2010; Seiger and
Merchant, 1997). Restoring invaded habitats by stimulating successional
processes through seeding and/or transplanting native
species can be a solution for both the conservation of native communities
and the control of invasive species (Sheley and Smith,
2012). Such alternative strategies have already been successfully
tested against various herbaceous invasive plants (Ammondt et al.,
2013; Cutting and Hough-Goldstein, 2012; Larson et al., 2013). For
F. japonica, planting Salicaceae cuttings is a promising solution.
Already tested sporadically by managers, restoration projects of
F. japonica invaded habitat using tree cuttings have had variable
success (Bart·k et al., 2010; Delbart et al., 2012; Deschamps, 2010;
Masson, 2002; Toews, 2012). Despite the promising outcomes of
such techniques (restoration associated with resistance to invasion),
no underlying mechanisms have been tested that could
explain the fluctuating outcome.
Allelopathy could be one mechanism involved in failures of
restoration experiments, by limiting growth of competing species.
Previous studies of allelopathy by the Fallopia complex have all
used controversial designs (Inderjit and Callaway, 2003). Laboratory
studies on seed germination with identified allelochemicals
extracted from the rhizome or the stem of F. japonica (Fan et al.,
2010; Vrchotov· and Ser·, 2008) do not replicate the natural concentration
of these molecules, whereas other studies which apply
activated charcoal (Murrell et al., 2011; Siemens and Blossey, 2007)
are controversial because this substance can also alter soil pH and
nutrient availability (Lau et al., 2008). In this study, we chose to test
the allelopathic potential of F. japonica on Salicaceae species in
greenhouse conditions by means of an original semi-controlled
experiment where donor and target pots are separated physically
to discriminate resource competition from allelopathy. This design
is built on previously cited studies in an effort to simulate conditions
closer to the natural situation and to explicitly address
chemically mediated interactions (Viard-CrÈtat et al., 2009). In
addition, to our knowledge, no experiment directly addresses the
role of allelopathy in cutting e development success.
We chose to assess the impact of F. japonica leachate on the
resprouting capacity and growth of three species from the two
genera represented in the Salicaceae family: Salix viminalis L., Salix
atrocinerea Brot. and Populus nigra L. We address the following
questions: (1) does F. japonica leachate limit the growth of Salicaceae
cuttings? (2) are target species equally affected? and (3) can
these effects be directly linked to polyphenol emission or are they
mediated by changes in soil properties? xmethods


 The experimental design adapted from Newman and Rovira
(1975) and Viard-CrÈtat (2009) involved ìdonor potsî and ìtarget
potsî to discriminate resource competition effects from allelochemical
effects (Fig. 1) in a factorial balanced design. In donor
pots, either a F. japonica individual was planted or bare ground was
left; in the target pots, one cutting of the three different target
species was planted. Pots were organised so that target pots were
irrigated with donor pot leachate by gravity.
The experiment included 58 pairs of one donor pot connected to
one target pot, i.e. 116 pots, and was conducted in greenhouse
conditions near Grenoble (France). Mean daily temperatures
recorded during the experiment ranged from 8 to 31 C. Donor pots
and target pots (volume 6 L) were filled with a soil mixture (4/6 of
sand, 1/6 of vermiculite-perlite and 1/6 of potting soil) to guarantee
homogeneity between pots and to combine a high ability to drain
and evacuate the leachate (sand properties) and a water and
nutrient (vermiculite, perlite and potting soil properties) retention
potential. All pots were watered several times before the experiment
started in order to wash out polyphenols contained naturally
in initial potting soil.
Donor pots had a 14-cm-wide opening on the bottom in which a
plastic funnel (B 15 cm) was put. On the top of the funnel, two
meshes with different sizes (5 mm and 2 mm) were superposed to
retain the soil. The funnel was connected to a polyethylene (PE)
tube through which the leachate flowed to the target pot. Each
donor pot was linked to a single fixed target pot. The place of each donor pot and target pot pair was randomised every two weeks to
limit potential bias from differences in microclimatic conditions
(temperature, air moisture or light). Temperature and air moisture
were continuously recorded with eight i-buttons (MAXIM) placed
above donor pots and at the target pot level. Rhizomes of F. japonica were collected on the 23rd of February
2012 in the region of Saint-Etienne (Chambon-Feugerolles,
455103200 N, 41803300 E) where the population had been genetically
identified as F. japonica (Dassonville et al., 2011). All the rhizomes
collected belong to the unique clone representing this species in
Western Europe (Bzdega et al., 2012; Hollingsworth and Bailey,
2000) and were considered as genetically uniform. Rhizomes
were washed and cut into 105 pieces from 30 to 50 g with two to
seven buds. The 105 rhizomes were planted in a greenhouse on the
29th February 2012, three weeks before the target pots were
installed. A sample of soil solution collected during the washings of
the collected rhizomeswas added to each of the donor pots (around
3 g/pot in each donor pot with and without F. japonica) at the
beginning of the experiment in order to reconstitute a microbial
community naturally associated with F. japonica in the pots. We
inoculated all donor pots with this solution of soil as Kov·rov· et al.(2011) have shown that Fallopia species can host mycorrhizal fungi,
leading to change in stilbene content of its below-ground biomass.
Two weeks after planting, the 29 most morphologically homogenous
young F. japonicas were selected and transferred into donor
pots with the 29 control donor pots filled with inoculated soil
medium only.
Among the 58 donor pots, five pots with F. japonica and five pots
with bare soil were randomly chosen and associated with target
pots without cuttings. These pots were named hereafter ìcontrol
potsî and were used for final chemical soil analyses in order to
check for any modification in mineral nitrogen content. Leachates
from these control donor pots were collected in PE flasks six times
during the experiment (three times in April and three times in May)
and analysed for polyphenol concentrations (see below for the
details of the analysis). All donor pots werewatered daily from Monday to Friday. Target
pots were only watered with leachate from donor pots. All donor
pots received the same amount of water, which was adjusted so as
to reach water saturation in all target pots. In order to avoid a potential
effect from nutritive stress, we watered donor pots twice a
month with NPK-enriched water concentrated at 0.2 mL/L. We
simultaneously irrigated target pots with a 0.4 mL/L NPK-enriched
water to complement pots for nutrients and reduce eventual
nutritive differences between the two donor treatments. Salicaceae species are already used in the implementation of
restoration techniques for their high resprouting capabilities and
rapid growth rates (Kuzovkina and Quigley, 2005). They are pioneer
species naturally growing along riverbanks in Europe and can
therefore form a close plant cover (Radtke et al., 2012) and rapidly
compete with F. japonica for light and nutrients. These characteristics
make them good candidates for the restoration of F. japonica
invaded areas.
Cuttings of S. viminalis L., S. atrocinerea Brot. and P. nigra L. were
provided by the PÙle National des Ressources GÈnÈtiques ForestiËres
plant nursery (GuÈmenÈ-Penfao, Loire-Atlantique, France).
We weighed and measured each cutting before the experiment and
chose the 16 most homogeneous individuals from each species,
excluding the largest and the smallest cuttings. Each of the treatments
(bare soil and F. japonica) were replicated eight times for
each target species, totaling 48 target pots with cuttings. Cuttings
measured 30 cm and were half-buried in target pots before bud
burst and before root establishment. Total polyphenol concentrations were measured regularly
throughout the experiment in the solutions leached from the 10
control pots. After measuring the water volume collected, each
solution was filtered (0.53 mm) and analysed for the concentration
of total phenol using Folin-Ciocalteu reactant (with gallic acid as a
standard) that detects polyphenols including flavonols, flavonoids,
anthraquinones and stilbenes through spectrophotometry at
760 nm, with all these compounds already identified in Fallopia
root extracts (Fan et al., 2010; Meiffren et al., 2010).
In mid-May 2012, approximately 50 g of target soilwas collected
for mineral N quantification in the first 5 cm depth from the 10
control target pots. At the same time, leachates were collected and
analysed for pH and mineral N content. Extraction was done with
50 mL K2SO4 0.5 M and 10 g of soil. NO3
 and NH4
˛ concentrations were obtained with an OI analytical Flow solution IV analyzer
colorimetric chain. Total N refers to the total mineral nitrogen
concentration calculated with NeNO3 and NeNH4.
At the end of July, above-ground and below-ground biomasses
of each cutting were collected, oven-dried at 70 C for 48 h and
weighed. We tested the effects of donor treatment (fixed factor with two
levels e bare soil and F. japonica) and target species identity (fixed
factor with three levels e S. viminalis, S. atrocinerea, P. nigra) on final
biomasses with two-factor ANOVAs. As interaction between donor
treatment and species identity was not significant and as we were
interested in the effect of F. japonica leachate at the species level, we
completed this global analysis by one-way ANOVAs performed for
each species one by one in order to test significance levels of the
donor treatment. We ran mixed-effects ANOVA with the date as a
random effect (each individual cutting was considered as the
grouping factor; six levels for the factor ìdateî e 4th April, 11th
April, 16th April, 2nd May, 9th May, 16th May) and donor treatment
as a fixed effect for polyphenol comparisons followed by Tukey
post-hoc tests.We tested for mineral N content and pH differences
between the two donor treatments (bare soil and F. japonica) with
one-way ANOVAs.
The ratio of above-ground to below-ground biomass was logtransformed
to respect normality and homoscedasticity.
All statistical analyses were carried out with the R software (R
Development Core Team, 2009). xresults All the cuttings resprouted whatever the species and the
treatment, showing no direct effect of F. japonica on cutting survival
and resprouting capacity.
F. japonica leachate modified the above-ground, below-ground
and total biomasses, as well as the ratio of above to below-ground
biomasses of the species compared to bare soil (for donor treatment:
all F1, 42 > 4.8; p < 0.034). Ratios of above-ground biomass to
below-ground biomass were significantly higher under F. japonica
than under bare soil, as a consequence of a higher susceptibility of
below-ground biomass to F. japonica leachate. Species differed in
biomass production (for species effect: all F2, 42 > 14.1; p < 0.001):
P. nigra was the species producing the most above-ground biomass
and the two Salix species produced more below-ground biomass
than the Populus species.
Interaction between species identity and donor treatment was
not significant for any of the biomass components (for
donor  species interaction: all F2, 42 <1.4; p > 0.264), showing that
the effect of F. japonica leachate was of similar direction for all
species but with different intensities (Fig. 2). Indeed, at species
levels, one-way ANOVAs showed that F. japonica leachate significantly
reduced the total biomass of two target species out of three
(Fig. 2). S. viminalis was the most sensitive species with both above and
below-ground biomasses affected by F. japonica (F1, 14 º 4.8;
p º 0.046 and F1, 14 º 11.1; p º 0.005 respectively). P. nigra cutting
above-ground biomass was reduced (F1, 14 º 7.0; p º 0.019) but
P. nigra below-ground biomass was not significantly affected by
F. japonica leachate (F1, 14 º 3.8; p º 0.071). S. atrocinerea cuttings
were much less sensitive to F. japonica leachate given that no significant
differences could be shown for any of the biomass components
(F1, 14 º 0.1; p º 0.776 and F1, 14 º 3.3; p º 0.090 for aboveground
biomass and below-ground biomass, respectively). None of
the above-ground to below-ground biomass ratios was significantly
affected by F. japonica when the species were studied one by one (F1,
14 º 2.1; p º 0.168 for S. viminalis, F1, 14 º 1.6; p º 0.224 for P. nigra
and F1, 14 º 1.8; p º 0.206 for S. atrocinerea). ANOVA revealed that F. japonica leachates contained significantly
more phenols than bare soil leachates (p º 0.011; F1,
8 º 10.91 for donor treatment).
Polyphenol concentration in leachate varied depending on the
date of the measurement (p < 0.001; F5, 40 º 46.18 for date factor)
and differences of polyphenol concentration between the two
donor treatments varied with time (p º 0.007; F5, 40 º 3.75 for the
interaction between date and donor treatment). Tukey post-hoc
tests revealed that polyphenol concentrations measured on the
2nd, 9th and 16th May were significantly higher than those
measured the previous weeks (Fig. 3). Indeed, leachates under
F. japonica contained between 3.08 and 4.93 mg L1 of polyphenol
on average and leachates collected under bare soil contained between
2.94 and 4.03 mg L1 on average.
There was a mean 14% more polyphenol in leachates under
F. japonica than under bare soil, with higher differences (˛15%
and ˛21%) during the warmest days, 2nd and 9th of May,
respectively). Fig. 4 gives the mean concentrations in nitrogen content
measured in leachates and soil medium of the 10 pairs of donor/
target control pots. The pH was around 7.5 in both the leachates
collected under F. japonica and the leachates collected under bare
soil. Nitrate and ammonium concentrations were globally high in
the soil medium. Nitrate concentrations ranged from 1.53 to
2.41 mg L1 in soil under F. japonica and from 1.09 to 1.5 mg L1 in
soil under bare soil (min and max raw values). Ammonium ranged
from 2.01 to 4.32 mg L1 in soil under F. japonica and from 2.17 to
3.88 mg L1 in soil under bare soil (min and max raw values). In
leachates (Fig. 4a), nitrate and ammonium concentrations were
lower than in soil (Fig. 4b) and highly variable.
No difference in nitrogen content appeared in leachates
collected under F. japonica and under bare soil (p º 0.37; F1, 8 º 0.92
for NH4
˛, p º 0.28; F1, 8 º 1.34 for NO3
 and p º 0.56; F1, 8 º 0.36 for
total N). No significant difference was detected for pH in leachates
under bare soil compared to leachates under F. japonica (p º 0.37;
F1, 8 º 0.90). Similarly, none of the differences were significant
between the two donor treatments for soil ammonium and total
nitrogen (p º 0.96; F1, 8 º 0.003 for NH4
˛, p º 0.75; F1, 8 º 0.11 for
total N). However, there was significantly more nitrate in soil
collected in target pots watered by F. japonica leachate than in those
watered by bare soil leachate (p º 0.002; F1, 8 º 21.0). 


xdiscussion
 In this experiment, we submitted the cuttings to F. japonica
leachate before they started to shoot and root, which corresponds to
restoration conditions. Management practices recommend planting
cuttings before budburst and before the beginning of rooting. We
tested the effect of leachate of young F. japonica, whereas in the field
F. japonica patches are sometimes several dozen years old and their
rhizomes are densely developed. It is likely that such well-installed
F. japonica is more aggressive and has a higher allelopathic potential
than the young individuals we tested.
The results showed a differential effect of F. japonica leachate
on the three target species: S. viminalis cuttings produced significantly less above-ground and below-ground biomass when
grown under F. japonica than when grown under bare soil.
P. nigra aerial biomass was not significantly affected by F. japonica
leachate, unlike its below-ground biomass. However, none of the
biomass components of S. atrocinerea cuttings were significantly
impacted by F. japonica leachate. Previous studies already
demonstrated differences in sensitivity to allelochemicals between
ligneous species (Orr et al., 2005). Although a mechanistic
explanation cannot be given, the results suggest that a differential
effect of F. japonica allelochemicals on tree species could
lead to shifts in species composition because less sensitive species
could gain a competitive advantage over more sensitive
species during colonisation and successional processes on
invaded areas (Orr et al., 2005). This hypothesis should be
confirmed through the evaluation of the role of allelopathy
compared to competition and other processes governing community
assemblage. Secondly, the present results confirm the
importance of choosing adapted species in restoration projects.
Restoring invaded habitats by planting competitive plant species
is gaining interest (Bakker and Wilson, 2004; Larson et al., 2013),
but its success depends on the choice of appropriate species
(Abella et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2008). S. atrocinerea seems to be
more resistant to F. japonicaís chemically mediated effect, which
makes this species a good candidate for restoration projects. In
general, Salix species are already employed to restore riparian
habitats. They resprout rapidly from cuttings and are particularly
efficient against erosion by water (Evette et al., 2009). Moreover,
they support a high faunal diversity (CavaillÈ et al., 2013;
Kuzovkina and Quigley, 2005). We suggest Salix cuttings be
tested as a solution to restore areas invaded by F. japonica but
field tests need to be conducted to compare sensitivity of
different Salix species to F. japonica toxicity at mid-term level.
To better understand the mechanisms underlying the success
of F. japonica over native species and improve restoration projects,
it would also be advantageous to study the interaction
between competition, allelopathy and management practices.
Allelopathic responses of target species depend on their
competition status (Viard-CrÈtat et al., 2013) and can be
enhanced by manipulating the donor species by fertilisation or
mowing (Viard-CrÈtat et al., 2009). As mowing is the most
common method used to control F. japonica stands, it could be
useful to control for any interaction between mowing and
allelopathy.The results reported herein confirm the allelopathic effect of
F. japonica and support the role played by some polyphenols in
its negative impact. Previous studies have shown that Fallopia
spp. could form mono-specific stands (Aguilera et al., 2010) and
could modify the activity and/or the composition of microbial
communities involved in the nitrogen cycle (Dassonville et al.,
2011). Moreover, addition of activated charcoal reduces the
negative effects of Fallopia spp. on neighbouring species (Murrell
et al., 2011; Siemens and Blossey, 2007). All these factors suggest
an effect of Fallopia spp. directly or indirectly mediated through
the soil, which could explain part of its remarkable success.
Biochemical studies of F. japonica rhizome identified original
compounds from the polyphenol family absent in Chinese clones
and able to inhibit germination and growth on several herbaceous
species (Fan et al., 2010). These compounds were identified
as the stilbenes glucoside piceatannol and resveratroloside, and
as the proanthocyanidins catechin and epicatechin.
4.2.1. F. japonica leachate did not reduce the resprouting capacity of
Salicaceae cuttings but decrease their growth
We show that F. japonica leachates did not reduce the survival
and resprouting capacity of European Salicaceae cuttings, whereas
they significantly reduced the growth of two of the three species
tested. Ratios of above-ground to below-ground biomass were
significantly higher when cuttings were watered by F. japonica
leachate than control cuttings, indicating a greater impact on roots
than on aerial parts. This result shows that growth allocation was
modified when cuttings received F. japonica leachate, similar to the
results of previous studies on seedlings (Orr et al., 2005; Turk and
Tawaha, 2003; Viard-CrÈtat et al., 2009; Vrchotov· and Ser·,
2008). Roots are particularly sensitive to allelochemicals because
they are in direct contact with them. Indeed, Centaurea maculosa
produces phenols such as ()-catechin that can cause cell death in
the root system of the co-occurring target species Arabidopsis
thaliana (L.) Heynh. (Callaway et al., 2005). Since F. japonica has also
been shown to produce catechin (Fan et al., 2010; Vrchotov· et al.,
2007), we could expect that roots are preferential targets for
F. japonica allelochemicals. This first result seems to support the
novel weapon hypothesis for F. japonica. The phytotoxic effect of the
exotic invasive F. japonica on native Salicaceae gives a new example
of the role of the novel weapon hypothesis in invader success.
However, the relative importance of this mechanism in natural
conditions needs further investigation.
Allelopathy has been detected in Salix (see Brown, 1967 for the
allelopathic effect of Salix pellita Anderss. on Pinus banksiana Lamb.)
and Populus genera (see Jobidon and Thibault, 1981 for the example
of allelopathic effect of Populus balsamifera L. on Alnus crispa Fern.).
This property must have given them more resistance to F. japonica
phytotoxic effects, given that plants producing phytotoxic compounds
are also susceptible to develop resistance to allelochemicals
in order to prevent autotoxicity through detoxification mechanisms
(Inderjit and Duke, 2003). Our design did not allow us to test this
hypothesis; however, it could be useful to compare the sensitivity
to F. japonica allelochemicals between different species depending
on whether or not they produce phytotoxic secondary compounds.This experiment demonstrates a negative effect of F. japonica
mediated by soil leachate which could not be explained by resource
competition. Indeed, target pots were watered regularly with a
nutrient-enriched solution to avoid nutritive stress and total N
content in target pots was not significantly different between the
two treatments. F. japonica leachates could act directly through
physical contact of the roots with allelochemicals or indirectly
through the modification of microbial activity. F. japonica is known
to contain polyphenols which once extracted from rhizomes have
an inhibitory effect on seed germination (Fan et al., 2010). Our results
add to this study by showing that F. japonica actively produces
secondary compounds during the growth season. Polyphenol
concentrations detected in this study were on the same order of
magnitude (i.e. a few milligrams per litre) as those observed in
similar experiments with Festuca paniculata (Viard-CrÈtat et al.,
2009). This study also confirmed that soluble polyphenols are
good candidates to explain the negative effect of F. japonica on
cutting growth. However, the Folin-Ciocalteu method used in this
study can only detect global phenol concentration, and only certain
specific compounds (e.g. anthraquinones) can be responsible for
allelopathy (Fan et al., 2010). The Folin-Ciocalteu method did not
allow us to identify the allelochemicals responsible for the inhibitory
effects observed. Our results support the hypothesis of the
toxicity of some of the polyphenols contained in F. japonica leachate
(Fan et al., 2010; Vrchotov· et al., 2010). Further experiments focussing on isolated chemicals are needed to elucidate the toxicity
mechanisms (Inderjit and Callaway, 2003).Our experimental design with a physical separation between
donor and target species allowed us to exclude direct competition
between species to be a plausible explanation for the F. japonica
effect. Furthermore, there were no differences in NH4
˛, NO3
 or pH in
leachate content, suggesting that F. japonica did not significantly
nor directly influence N metabolism. However, in soil target pots
we detected no effect of F. japonica on total N content, but more
NO3
 under F. japonica than under bare soil (˛62% on average). This
effect could tend to reduce the inhibitory effect of F. japonica
leachates through soil enrichment and cutting growth stimulation.
However, results showed that the negative effect of leachates was
stronger than the positive effect of fertilisation as cuttings produced
less biomass under F. japonica than under bare soil. Such
double effect (inhibition and fertilisation) has already been reported
in Festuca paniculata (L.) Schinz & Thell (Viard-CrÈtat et al.,
2009) and authors raised the hypothesis of indirect effects
through microbial equilibriums to be responsible of the soil nitrate
enrichment. In our study, as there were no differences in NH4
˛
concentrations, F. japonica may well influence nitrogen soil
composition indirectly via a reduction of denitrification.
Dassonville et al. (2011) already reported the ability of F. japonica to
change the activity of microbial communities and particularly to
reduce the potential denitrification enzyme activity. Tharayil et al.
(2013) also found a reduction of N-mineralisation under
F. japonica patches and linked it to the concentration of tannins
contained in F. japonica litter. The present study shows that
F. japonica was also able to produce polyphenols during the
growing season that could modify the soilís nitrogen composition.
The reduction of N-mineralisation in soil could reduce N loss in a
gaseous form and favour N forms available to the plant (Dassonville
et al., 2011). F. japonica has been reported to increase soil nitrogen
in its native range, which can be seen as an adaptation to nitrogenlimited
volcanic habitat (Hirose and Tateno, 1984; Tateno and
Hirose, 1987). Allelopathy studies are complex and raise several methodological
issues. Laboratory experiments can test the effects of isolated
chemicals on model species but do not reflect field conditions
because their concentrations can differ from natural ones and their
effect in the soil may depend on their solubility and stability
(Inderjit and Callaway, 2003). In field experiments, allelopathic
effects cannot be easily distinguished from competition interactions,
and experiments using activated charcoal generate bias
because this substance modifies plant biomass and microbial activity
(Lau et al., 2008; Viard-CrÈtat et al., 2009). Here we attempted
to simulate field conditions as closely as possible, using an original
design separating competitive interaction from chemical interference
and used the leachate of a living plant to mediate the chemical
interaction. Repeated nutritive additions could lead to differences
from field conditions, especially if in natural situations F. japonica
has a strong impact on N status. However, we chose to add nutrients
to donor pots as some species have been shown to produce
more allelopathic compounds under nutritive stress, which could
have led to over-estimating the impact of F. japonica leachate on
target species (Hierro and Callaway, 2003). We also chose to add
nutrients directly to target pots in order to remove potential bias of
differential nutritive richness of leachate under F. japonica
compared to bare soil. The final analyses of nitrogen composition
confirmed that there was no significant difference in total nitrogen
content of target pots. Although our experiment was time-limited
and although polyphenol synthesis and release have been shown
to depend on the seasons, we studied the leachate effect continuously
during spring and summer, which are the seasons of high
catechin production in C. maculosa (Inderjit et al., 2006). Moreover,
this experiment took place during the growth period of F. japonica,
which is also the growth period of target species and therefore the
root system development period and potentially a period of high
sensitivity to allelochemicals. This study confirms the allelopathic potential of the invasive
F. japonica and shows its inhibitory effect on cuttings of European
Salicaceae species. F. japonica produces phytotoxic soluble compounds
which reduce the growth of native tree species, thus supporting
the novel weapon hypothesis. This work also highlighted
differential sensitivities of the target Salicaceae species, which
makes these results potentially very useful to managers since the
choice of species to restore invaded areas is crucial (Abella et al.,
2012; Brown et al., 2008). Using resistant Salicaceae cuttings in
restoration projects, particularly in invaded areas, could help to
rapidly install a plant cover able to compete with F. japonica. Such
technical solutions are appealing for long-term management strategies
as competitive properties of restored plant communities
should increase with time.