xabstract
We examined the effect of the exotic macrophyte, para grass (Urochloa mutica), on benthic and epiphytic macroinvertebrates of a tropical floodplain in northern Australia. Macroinvertebrates were sampled from four grass communities: (1) para grass, (2) hymenachne (Hymenachne acutigluma), a native perennial; (3) rice (Oryza meridionalis), a native annual, and (4) areas where para grass had been sprayed with herbicide.2. Macroinvertebrate richness, abundance and community similarity showed very few differences among the grass communities, particularly in the epiphytic habitat. Benthic invertebrates showed some differences among grasses, with lower richness and abundance and different community structure associated with hymenachne. Herbicide control of para grass had no apparent effect on benthic invertebrates but reduced the abundance of epiphytic invertebrates in the short term.3. The results of this study indicate that para grass has very little impact on macroin- vertebrate communities, despite the changes to macrophyte communities. This is probably because para grass has similar physical structure to the native grasses and because none of these grasses contribute directly to aquatic food webs. Control of para grass using herbicide has little impact on aquatic invertebrates. This suggests that predicting the impact of weed invasion in wetlands requires an understanding of both the functional properties of macrophytes and the habitat preferences of the macroinvertebrates.

xintroduction
The invertebrates living in association with aquatic macrophytes are important in freshwater ecosystems because they are abundant and productive (Cooper & Knight, 1985), provide food for birds (Batzer et al., 1993) and fish (Crowder & Cooper, 1982), and can have an important role in ecological processes such as decomposition and energy transfer (McQueen, Post &Mills, 1986; Dvorak, 1996). Invertebrates can show a strong preference for macrophytes as they increase habitat per unit area of benthos, and may provide a direct or indirect source of food or protection from predators (Crowder & Cooper, 1982; Dvorak & Best, 1982; Newman, 1991; Dvorak, 1996). However, not all plant species perform the same functions, and macro- invertebrate richness, abundance and community composition usually differ between macrophyte spe- cies (Cyr & Downing, 1988; Chilton, 1990; Humphries, 1996). Therefore, processes that change species com- position of macrophyte communities are likely to cause changes in plant-associated macroinvertebrates, their predators, and related ecological processes.In northern Australia, large areas of tropical flood- plain are threatened by the invasion of several species of exotic grasses (Humphries, Groves & Mitchell, 1991; Douglas, Finlayson & Storrs, 1998), which dramatically alter macrophyte communities (Wilson, Brocklehurst & Whitehead, 1991; Cowie & Werner, 1993). Para grass [Urochloa mutica (Forssk.) T.Q. Nguyen], a perennial stoloniferous grass from Africa, was introduced to Australia in 1884 to control river bank erosion, but has since been widely promoted as a pasture grass throughout northern Australia (Middleton, 1991). It is considered a weed outside pastoral systems, and its aggressive invasion of tropical wetlands has led to its listing among the 18 environmental weeds having potential to cause seri- ous impact on a nationally significant scale (Humph- ries et al., 1991).In the early 1900s (Wesley-Smith, 1973), para grass was introduced as a pasture grass to the area now recognised as Kakadu National Park, a region con- taining wetlands of internationally recognised conser- vation significance (Finlayson & Woodroffe, 1996). By the early 1990s, para grass was identified as a species with fairly limited distribution within the Park, but with the capacity to dominate large areas of relatively undisturbed plant communities (Cowie & Werner, 1993). Park managers were concerned about the continued spread of the species, and considered the use of herbicide to control it, but had little information to assess the environmental effects of the weed or its chemical control.An early step in assessing the potential threat of para grass is quantifying the effects of invasion on wetland fauna. The effects of para grass on channel morphology, hydrology and aquatic food webs have been studied for a perennial lowland stream (Bunn, Davies & Kellaway, 1997; Bunn et al., 1998), but are unknown for invertebrate communities in seasonal wetlands. Our goal was to uncover potential effects of this exotic macrophyte on benthic and epiphytic macroinvertebrates in para grass communities by comparison with macroinvertebrate communities associated with two common native grasses that para grass displaces: the annual, rice (Oryza meridionalis N.Q. Ng), and the perennial, hymenachne [Hymen- achne acutigluma (Steud.) Gilliland]. Areas of para grass that were treated with herbicide were also sampled to determine the possible effects of weed management activities on aquatic macroinvertebrates.

xmethods
Study site and speciesThe study was undertaken on Magela Creek floodplain, a major tributary of the East Alligator River in Kakadu National Park, Northern Territory, Australia. This region is in the wet-dry tropics, and consequently most of the 150 km2 floodplain is only inundated seasonally (Williams, 1979). Inundation usually occurs from Janu- ary to July, and water levels drop steadily after rains cease, usually in April. The area contains a mosaic of different native vegetation types interspersed with patches of para grass. The most widespread grassland communities were dominated by three species: H. acu- tigluma ( 15% of floodplain area), Pseudoraphis spines- cens ( 14%), and O. meridionalis ( 12%) (Finlayson, 1993). Because para grass has displaced large areas of rice and hymenachne in this area (Cowie & Werner, 1993), these species were chosen for comparison with para grass. In the study area, rice typically occurred around the shallower, landward areas of the floodplain, whereas hymenachne was found in deeper areas, often adjacent to palaeochannels or permanent billabongs; para grass occurred more widely across this gradient. All three macrophytes are emergent grasses, although large parts of the stems and leaves are submerged for several months each year. All have simple, linear leaves of similar dimensions providing similar surface area per volume of water, and habitat area for epiphytic invertebrates (M. Douglas, unpublished data).Four study sites were sampled, with two sites located in each of two regions. The two regions (northern and southern) were 25 km north of the township of Jabiru (12°40¢S, 132°50¢E) and were sep- arated by approximately 2 km. Sites within each region were separated by approximately 300 m. Sites were selected to contain a plot dominated by each of the three grasses. Plots ranged in size from 0.1 to 1 ha, and were separated by approximately 50 m. An additional plot of para grass was selected at each site, and these were aerially sprayed with herbicide (Roundup BiactiveÒ (Monsanto Australia Ltd., Brook- lyn, Victoria, Australia), active constituent: 360 g L)1 glyphosate) in December 1997, just prior to inundation.Sample collection and processingEpiphytic macroinvertebrates inhabiting these plots were sampled twice during each of two wet seasons,in February and April 1998 and in January and March 1999. Benthic invertebrates were sampled in February and April 1998 only.All sampling was carried out from an airboat, as the risk of crocodile attack prevented safe access to the water. Epiphytic samples were collected using a 250- lm mesh D-shaped net, 70 cm deep with a 30-cm diameter opening. The net was swept four times through a 2·0.5 m area of the plot to a depth of approximately 50 cm. Benthic samples were collected with an electric suction sampler (Brooks, 1994), with the intake hose attached to a 4-m long aluminium pole. The pump was run for 1 min as the pole was used to disturb the substratum over a 0.5 · 1 m area. Samples were sieved (300 lm mesh) in the field to remove fine silt. For each microhabitat, two random samples were taken from each plot and these were kept separate in processing. Replicate samples were collected at least 10 m apart, avoiding areas disturbed by the airboat or within 5 m of the edge of the plot. Samples were preserved in the field in 70% ethanol.In the laboratory, samples were washed through stacked sieves (2.8 mm, 1 mm and 300 lm). The 2.8 mm fraction was sorted under an illuminated magnifying glass and the 1 mm portion was sorted using a dissecting microscope (10· magnification). The 300 lm fraction was subsampled using the method described by Hickley (1975) where samples were made up to 1 L and aerated for at least 2 min using bubbling air to homogenise the sample. Ten percent (100 mL) subsamples were then removed and the entire contents of each subsample was counted. If the subsample contained less than 200 animals the process was repeated until at least 200 animals were obtained (the total number counted varied because the entire sub- sample containing the 200th animal was counted). Abundance for the whole sample was then calculated from the total number counted and the proportion of the total sample sorted. Identification was performed to the family level (subfamily for Chironomidae) for samples collected in 1998 except for microcrustacea, Oligochaeta and Acarina. Although lower levels of taxonomy were not routinely possible because of time constraints, in 1999 invertebrates were identified to genus where possible (with the above exceptions) to determine the influence of taxonomic resolution on any differences among grasses.To help explain patterns in the invertebrate data, duplicate measurements of four environmentalvariables were taken within each plot on each samp- ling date. Water depth was measured and percentage emergent plant cover was estimated within a 0.5 · 2 m quadrat. Water temperature and dissolved oxygen were measured at 10 cm below the water surface and immediately above the substratum using a multiparameter probe (Horiba, U-10, Kyoto, Japan).Data analysisFour-factor A N O V A s were carried out to examine the effect of macrophyte community (‘grass’), sampling date (‘date’), region on the floodplain (‘region’) and study site (‘site’) on total abundance and taxonomic richness of macroinvertebrate communities. Grass and date were considered fixed, region and site (nested in region) were considered random. Where necessary, data were transformed [log10 (x + 1)] or arc sine) to meet the assumptions of homogeneity of variances. Correlations were performed to examine relationships between invertebrate richness and abun- dance [log10 (x + 1) transformed] and the environ- mental variables. Pearson’s coefficient was used, as relationships between variables were linear. Analysis of Similarities (A N O S I M ; Clarke, 1993) was used to compare differences in Bray-Curtis dissimilarity val- ues of the invertebrate communities between macro- phytes. A N O S I M s were performed for each sampling date using the log10 (x + 1) abundance data, averaged across the two replicate samples from each site, using 999 randomisations. Where A N O S I M indicated a sig- nificant difference between para grass or sprayed para grass and other grasses, similarity percentages (S I M - P E R ; Clarke, 1993) were calculated to determine the contribution of particular invertebrate taxa to between-group differences. Non-metric multidimen- sional scaling ordinations (N M D S ; Clarke, 1993) were performed to illustrate differences between inverteb- rate communities when A N O S I M indicated differences between grass type. All multivariate analyses werecarried out using the P R I M E R (Clarke & Warwick, 1994).

xresults
Environmental variablesWater depth ranged from 0.4 to 2.7 m and was generally highest in hymenachne (1.8 m) and lowestin rice (0.9 m). Water temperatures ranged from 28 to 34°C and dissolved oxygen ranged from 0 to 7.8 mg L)1 and both were usually slightly lower in the benthic habitat than at the surface. Plant cover was consistently high (60–80%) in the two perennial grasses, whereas cover of the annual grass (rice) almost doubled between sampling dates in both years (from  30 to 60%). Plant cover was very low in sprayed para grass at the first sampling date, but increased over time as the vegetation recolonised or regenerated (from  3 to 30%).Faunal compositionA total of 76 invertebrate taxa were identified from the benthic and epiphytic microhabitats. Total richness was higher in the epiphytic microhabitat than the benthic microhabitat for all grass types (hymenachne, 64 versus 25; para grass, 57 versus 33; rice, 57 versus 41; sprayed para grass, 55 versus 39) and this was due largely to greater richness of coleopterans and hem- ipterans. The benthic fauna was a subset of the epiphytic fauna, containing only one unique family (Erpobdellidae).In both the benthic and epiphytic habitat, a small number of taxa were numerically dominant, with the 10 most abundant taxa in each habitat accounting for over 90% of total abundance (Table 1). Microcrusta- ceans alone accounted for at least two-thirds of the fauna in each grass type. In the benthic habitat,relative abundance was similar between grasses, although Oribatidae were more common in sprayed para grass than elsewhere, whereas Oligochaeta and Hydracarina were more common in hymenachne than elsewhere. In the epiphytic habitat, relative abun- dance was similar between grasses, although Oligo- chaetes were generally more common in sprayed para grass than elsewhere.Benthic richness and abundanceMean taxonomic richness and abundance in benthic samples varied between grass types, but not consis- tently across dates and regions (Table 2). Richness was significantly lower in hymenachne, except in the southern region in February (Fig. 1a). Abundance was significantly lower in hymenachne than in all other grasses (Table 2, Fig. 1b). Benthic abundance was positively correlated with dissolved oxygen concen- tration in hymenachne (r 1⁄4 0.75), and negatively correlated with plant cover in para grass (r 1⁄4 )0.83).Epiphytic richness and abundanceEpiphytic family richness showed no overall differ- ence between grasses, but the interactions between grass and site, and between grass and date and site were significant (Table 2). Family richness at site 2 in 1998 was significantly lower in sprayed para grass in February and significantly higher in hymenachne inApril (Fig. 2a). At site 3 in 1999, richness was significantly higher in hymenachne in January and significantly higher in sprayed Para grass in March (Fig. 2a). Richness at the generic level also showed no overall variation among grass types, but a significant interaction between grass and site, and between grass and date and site (Table 2), however, posthoc tests failed to reveal this difference. Mean generic richness increased significantly between the two sampling dates in 1999 from 31.5 ± 1.6 to 39.5 ± 1.3 genera per sample. Epiphytic abundance varied between grasses, but not consistently between dates or sites (region) (Table 2). In three of the four sites, abundance in February 1998 was significantly lower in sprayed para grass than in other grasses (Fig. 2b). The factor site, and all its interactions were significant for all three variables (Table 2).Epiphytic richness and abundance were both pos- itively correlated with dissolved oxygen concentration in surface water in sprayed para grass (r 1⁄4 0.73 and r 1⁄4 0.76, respectively) and with plant cover (arc-sine transformed) in para grass (r 1⁄4 0.54 and r 1⁄4 0.79, respectively), sprayed para grass (r 1⁄4 0.56 and r 1⁄4 0.77, respectively) and rice (r 1⁄4 0.53 for both).Macroinvertebrate communitiesThere were significant differences among benthic communities associated with the four grasses inFebruary 1998 (r 1⁄4 0.41, P < 0.01; Fig. 3). Pair-wise comparisons revealed that the hymenachne commu- nity was significantly different to all other grasses (hymenachne versus para grass, r 1⁄4 0.41, P < 0.01; hymenachne versus sprayed para grass, r 1⁄4 0.41, P < 0.01; hymenachne versus rice, r 1⁄4 0.41, P < 0.01). More than half (54–60%) of the difference between the hymenachne community and those in other grasses was caused by the lower abundance of seven common taxa in hymenachne, with each contributing at least 5% to the between-group dissimilarity (Table 3). There were no significant differences in benthic communities in April 1998 or in epiphytic communities on any sampling date.

xdiscussion
Macroinvertebrates were largely insensitive to differ- ences among the grass communities, particularly in the epiphytic habitat. The lack of variation in epiphy- tic richness among grasses is unlikely to be an artefact of taxonomic resolution, as results were similar for both family and genus richness. Although some tests of the main effects had low statistical power, plots of richness and abundance did not suggest any consis- tent differences between grass types.The great similarity of the epiphytic invertebrates associated with the three macrophyte species exam- ined in the present study contrasts with other studiesthat have typically shown a close relationship be- tween macrophyte species and invertebrate biomass, abundance and richness (e.g. Cyr & Downing, 1988;Chilton, 1990; Humphries, 1996; van den Berg et al., 1997). In such studies, differences were usually most apparent where the macrophyte species differed ingrowth form (e.g. submerged versus emergent) and⁄or density, structural complexity or architecture (e.g. broad versus dissected leaves), as these plantcharacteristics can determine water quality, colonis- able area and food resources (Heck & Crowder, 1991). There was little variation in such plantcharacteristics among the three macrophytes in the present study.Epiphytic invertebrate communities may also vary among macrophyte species as a result of the interac- tion between plant structural complexity and fish predation (Gilinsky, 1984; Heck & Crowder, 1991). However, this effect is unlikely to differ among macrophytes in the present study, because of the similar habitat afforded by the three grasses. Many plant-associated invertebrates are algivores (Dvorak & Best, 1982). Therefore, from an invertebrate perspec- tive, providing habitat for epiphytic algae may be the most important role of macrophytes (de Szalay & Resh, 1996), an idea that is in line with evidence fromstable isotope studies suggesting that epiphytic algae are the main ultimate source of carbon for aquatic macroinvertebrates on Magela Creek floodplain (S. Bunn. unpublished data). The importance of epiphytic algae as food may thus contribute to the similar invertebrate communities in the three grasses, which would all provide structurally similar habitats for epiphytic algae, in spite of the large differences in plant species richness and composition in the three investigated macrophyte communities (Wilson et al., 1991).Benthic invertebrates showed some differences between grasses, with benthic invertebrates in hymenachne different from the other two grasses. Hymenachne occurred at deeper sites where dis- solved oxygen concentrations were usually lower, particularly close to the sediment surface. In fact, the lowest dissolved oxygen concentrations (<0.5 mg L)1) were recorded in hymenachne in April 1998. This coincided with the lowest benthic abundance, and these two variables were very strongly correlated in this grass type. The greater depths and abundance of detritus we observed beneath hymenachne undoubtedly increases biological oxygen demand, which depresses invertebrate densities. In areas where para grass was not well established, hymenachne occurred across a broader range of depths, and it is possible that shallower beds of hymenachne support macroinvertebrate communities more similar to those associated with the other grasses.The application of the herbicide Roundup BiactiveÒ may be effective in controlling para grass, as it substantially reduced para grass cover, allowing rapid recolonisation of treated areas by native macrophytes.Herbicide was applied before the flood plains were inundated and thus before aquatic invertebrates had colonised the vegetation. Herbicide application had no apparent detrimental effect on benthic macroin- vertebrates, and although the abundance of epiphytic invertebrates was lower in sprayed para grass than in other grasses, this reduction did not persist beyond the first sampling date after herbicide treatment. Reduced macrophyte cover in the treated areas probably caused the reduced abundance of epiphytic invertebrates. Plant cover and invertebrate richness and abundance were highly correlated in sprayed para grass, and areas without macrophytes typically support lower biomass of invertebrates than veget- ated areas (Gilinsky, 1984). Other studies that have also found limited effects of macrophyte control on invertebrates have emphasised the importance of maintaining nearby untreated areas as refuges and a source of colonists (Monahan & Caffrey, 1996). Therefore, the relatively small-scale removal of vege- tation in the experiment reported here may have less impact on invertebrate recolonisation than larger- scale weed control activities. Furthermore, before advocating widespread use of this herbicide in the region, its effects on other components of the fauna, such as frogs, should be assessed.In summary, the invasion of para grass into areas of hymenachne or rice had no significant detrimental effects on aquatic macroinvertebrates living among or beneath the vegetation. Control of para grass may still be a desirable management goal because of its substantial impacts on both vegetation and birds (Wilson et al., 1991; Cowie & Werner, 1993; Whitehead & Dawson, 2000). The relative innocuity of para grass was unexpected, given the usually close associations between macrophyte species and associated macro- invertebrate fauna (Cyr & Downing, 1988; Chilton, 1990; Humphries, 1996). The insensitivity of the macroinvertebrates was probably because of the similarity in growth form and structure of the three macrophytes and because the major functional role in aquatic food webs of all three macrophytes on this flood plain is probably in providing habitat for epiphytic algae, which are the dominant invertebrate food source. Therefore, para grass invasion on the Magela Creek floodplain represents the replacement of one grass with another similar one, and macroin- vertebrates seem insensitive to subtle differences between native and exotic grasses. Para grass invasionmay have more noticeable impacts where it invades stands of macrophytes with very different growth forms or surface area, such as submerged species or the thin-stemmed emergents, such as Eleocharis spp. To predict the impact of other exotic macrophytes on aquatic macroinvertebrate communities, it is neces- sary to understand the habitat specificity of the invertebrates and the direct and indirect roles of the macrophytes in providing food.
