xabstract
A field experiment was used to quantify the effects of carp (Cyprinus car- pio) biomass density and size-structure on dissolved oxygen, conductivity, turbidity, pH, temperature, nutrient concentrations and algal biomass in replicated enclosures. The treatments in this field experiment comprised different combinations of large (2 kg) and small (0.7 kg) carp, and low (330 kg/ha), intermediate (570 kg/ha) and high (650 kg/ha) biomass densities. The impacts of carp were more size-dependent than described in previous studies. In particular, carp size was more important than carp biomass density in determining the concentration of total phosphorus and algal bio- mass. On the other hand, a more even mix of carp sizes increased total nitrogen. These results were compared to other studies of carp impacts. Although carp size tends to be poorly and inconsistently reported, and focused on small carp if mechanisms of nutri- ent mobilization are tested, there is evidence that differences in carp size explain some of the conflicting results among carp studies. We argue that there is a continuum of ef- fects where larger carp tend to mobilise phosphorus through sediment suspension and smaller carp tend to mobilise phosphorus through excretion. Additionally, we suggest that there is little evidence for a carp size effect on nitrogen among various studies, re- generation of nitrogen by carp is mostly from excretion and, consequently nitrogen re- generation is likely to be proportional to the biomass of carp.

xintroduction
Benthivorous fish can represent a high proportion of the biomass in lentic and lotic fresh waters. For example, in Europe lentic waters are often dominated by benthivores such as bream (Abramis brama), roach (Rutilis rutilis) or carp, sometimes exceeding 80 percent of the fish biomass (e. g. Crivelli 1981, Breukelaar et al. 1994). It is recognized, at least since observations on carp impacts in Wisconsin, North America by Cahn (1929) that benthivores can be the dominant influence on freshwater ecosystems. Increases in sediment resus- pension, turbidity and less frequently, nutrient concentrations and algal bio- mass are often associated with increased biomass density of benthivorous fish (e. g. Meijer et al. 1990, Qin & Threlkeld 1990, Richardson et al. 1990, Breukelaar et al. 1994, Cline et al. 1994, Roberts et al. 1995, King et al. 1997, Lougheed et al. 1998, Parkos et al. 2003).The size distribution of a benthivorous fish population could be as impor- tant as biomass density for determining ecosystem effects. Larger bream and carp tend to dig deeper into the sediments (Lammens & Hoogenboezem 1991), and larger carp (1600 to 3800 g) destroy more vegetation (Crivelli 1983). Conversely, there is a negative correlation between the release rate of phosphorus from carp excretion (μg P · g–1 fish–1 hr–1) and the wet weight of small carp (3 to ca. 1000 g, Lamarra 1975). Such changes in excretion rates with fish size are associated with ontogenetic diet shifts, and are a conse- quence of altered concentrations of nutrients in fish tissues and mass-specific ingestion rates (Ebenman & Persson 1988, Vanni 1996). In the case of carp and other benthivores, the shift from the larval state to the juvenile state in- volves a transition from zooplanktivory to benthivory (Lammens & Hoogen- boezem 1991, Yako et al. 1996, Villizi & Walker 1999).Further, interactions among different-size fish can modify the growth, prey selection and habitat use of one or more size classes (Persson 1985, Polis 1988, Stein et al. 1988). In particular, competition among species or age clas- ses can lead to niche segregation (e. g. Persson & Greenberg 1990). For ex- ample, in resource-rich environments larger-size cohorts are often dominant in interference competition. Smaller individuals are consequently forced into niche contraction and sub-optimal resource use (Persson 1983, 1985, Polis 1988).This study aimed to refine the current view of benthivore impacts by also considering benthivore size, and not just benthivore biomass. We hypothesised that the indirect water quality effects due to mobilisation of sediments would be a greater influence on ecosystem responses than predation and excretion in a population dominated by larger individuals. Additionally, as discussed above, previous studies have indicated that prey use would be very similar be- tween the carp sizes used in this experiment, and therefore interference andexploitative competition could affect feeding efficiency of both size classes (sensu Stein et al. 1988). Hence, we also hypothesised that the magnitude of the general effects on turbidity, nutrient concentrations and phytoplankton abundance would be less in combined carp-size treatments.

xmethods
Site description and construction of enclosuresA 100 m long, 30 m wide pond, varying in depth between one and two metres, was used for the field experiment. The pond was located 20 m from the Broken River, north-east Victoria, Australia. The substratum largely consisted of fine sediments, par- ticularly clay. The pond was drained back to a reservoir at one end outside the experi- mental area, and the vegetation was slashed and left to decompose for two months dur- ing enclosure construction. The experimental area consisted of 26 five by 13 m enclo- sures that were separated by 0.4 mm thick, 1 m high opaque plastic sheets, which were pegged and buried within 300 mm troughs. Each enclosure had a wall that faced into a central channel. These walls had 1500 holes of 2.8 mm diameter that allowed a slow low-turbulence inflow of water into the enclosure from the channel to maintain water levels. Water levels were automatically maintained during the experiment using a timed pisciculture pump and water from the nearby Broken River. Each enclosure was deeper at the channel end and had a depth within 0.1– 0.2 m in the littoral zone. Enclo- sures were deeper at the reservoir end of the pond, and ranged from 0.35 m to 0.75 m during the experiment. Before fish introduction the dominant plant species was umb- rella sedge (Cyperus eragrostis), with the remaining five percent an even mix of mostly curled dock (Rumex crispus) and water couch (Paspalum distichum).Fish sampling and treatment designOn 12 October 1995, carp were collected from Lake Moodemere, Rutherglen, Victoria using a boat electrofisher (Harvey & Cowx 1996). The length (mm) and weight (g) of each fish was recorded. The fish were then transported to the experimental pond within an aerated tank, re-weighed, measured and placed into treatment enclosures within a six-hour period.The physical layout of the experiment was based on a randomized complete block design (Manly 1996) with six treatments that were randomly allocated within each of four replicate blocks. Four of the treatments comprised the factorial combination of carp size (‘small’ and ‘large’) with carp biomass density (‘low’ and ‘high’). The re- maining two treatments were a ‘no-fish’ control treatment, and a mix of large and small carp at intermediate density (Table 1). The remaining two ‘fish storage’ enclosu- res were used to store fish in case replacements were required. The densities used, ranging from 0 to 864 kg/ha represented carp densities that have been recorded in the wild, although the highest carp densities are typically associated with human impacts and waters outside the natural range of carp (e. g. Crivelli 1981, Driver et al., in press). Further, previous research indicates that biomass densities above 400 kg/ha(‘high’ biomass densities, Table 1) are high enough to demonstrate carp impacts on turbidity (e. g. Roberts et al. 1995). Clusters in sizes in the carp population sampled in Lake Moodemere were used to determine the categories large (ca. 2000 g) and small used in the experiment (ca. 600 –700 g). Average weights (g) ( ± standard error) of large carp and small carp were respectively 2015 (± 58), 2084 (± 66) and 2214 (± 71) and 579 ( ± 49), 664 ( ± 54) and 708 ( ± 57) for days 0, 23 and 53.Fish were caught in the enclosures with a seine net and re-weighed and measured on 18 December 1995 (day 69) to verify the treatment structure had been maintained, and to estimate growth rates. Treatment densities at 2 November 1995 (day 23) and 2 De- cember 1995 (day 53) were back-calculated using fish lengths measured on day 69 as- suming a linear increase in length, and using a length-weight relationship determined from all measured fish data (preliminary analyses indicated that lengths between the sampling trips could be accurately estimated by assuming linear growth). The pond was drained and all fish were destroyed on 13 February 1996 (day 126). Collection and holding at the start of the experiment, and humane destruction of carp at the end of the experiment were performed under the guidelines of a Victorian Department of Conser- vation and Natural Resources Permit 95/R/040A.Field and laboratory techniquesMeasurement of water quality and sampling took place before the introduction of carp into the enclosures on 10 October 1995 (day 0), and then after introduction of carp into the enclosures on 2 November 1995 (day 23) and 2 December 1995 (day 53). All wa- ter quality variables were measured or sampled 0.5 m from the pond edge, 0.05 m be- low the water surface and within one of six subsections across the width of each enclo- sure that was randomly selected on each date. Dissolved oxygen, temperature, pH and conductivity were measured with a multi probe water quality meter (Hydrolab 1994). Turbidity, nutrient and chlorophyll-a samples were frozen at –20 ̊C immediately after sampling and stored for four months before analysis. 500 ml water samples were taken for turbidity, nitrogen (nitrites and nitrates) and total phosphorus analyses and were stored in high-density polyethylene containers. Laboratory turbidity (NTU) measure- ments were taken with a Dr. Lange turbidity meter (Trübungsphotimeter LTP4) from water that was stirred during measurement. Total phosphorus and nitrogen samples were digested using alkaline peroxodisulphate digestion (Woo & Maher 1995). Nutrient concentrations were then measured using a Lachat flow injection analyser (Lachat Instrument Co., Milwaukee, WI). Known concentrations of nitrogen (NOx) and phosphorus (PO4) were used during both digestion and the Flow Injection Analysis to allow calibration of results. 100 ml water samples were taken to measure chloro- phyll-a. These samples were filtered onto borosilicate micro-fibre filter papers (47mm, Advantec MFS Inc – Grade GC50), placed into 10 ml plastic centrifuge tubes and wrapped in aluminium foil for storage. In the laboratory chlorophyll-a concentrations were assessed using 90 percent ethanol digestion and UV visible spectrophotometry (APHA 1992). Photographs of each enclosure at day 53 were used to estimate the per- centage cover class of emergent and floating aquatic vegetation, which included multi- cellular green algae because of their functional similarity. Percentage cover class wasestimated using the Braun-Blanquet scale (Braun-Blanquet 1932), where 0 = no or negligible cover, 1 = present but less than 1%, 2 = >1–5%, 3 = >5 to 25%, 4 = >25– 50%, 5 = >50–75% and 6 = >75–100%.Statistical methodsThe effects of the no-fish and five carp treatments (Table 1) on each water quality vari- able were examined using ANOVA (GENSTAT 2000). The responses of these varia- bles to the treatments were analysed by partitioning treatment sums of squares into five single degree-of-freedom (df) orthogonal contrasts: 1. No fish versus carp (df = 1); 2. Single size of carp versus large and small carp (df = 1); 3. A factorial design in- corporating carp biomass density and carp size effects comprising a. high biomass density versus low biomass density (df = 1), b. large carp versus small carp (df = 1) and c. the interaction of a. and b. (df = 1). Data gained from day zero were used as covariates to adjust for pre-treatment differences among enclosures. If the effect of the covariate was non-significant, it was removed from the model. The effect of the time of observation was examined by analysing data from day 23 and day 53 jointly as a split-plot (Manly 1996), using the time factor as sub-plots. This approach was taken as treatment effects were nested within blocks, and time effects were nested within block and treatment effects, with the block effect as the highest stratum and the time effect as the lowest stratum. Transformations [loge(x+1) or (x+0.5)0.5] of variables were used to increase homogeneity of variance where required. Differences among treatment means were determined using Fisher’s Least Significant Difference (LSD, GENSTAT 2000). Only statistically significant interactions were plotted. Additionally, because the analyses were primarily on treatment effects at days 23 and 53, only data from days 23 and 53 were plotted. The difference in the Braun-Blanquet percentage cover of emergent and floating aquatic vegetation between carp and no carp enclosures was tested using the Mann-Whitney U-test (SYSTAT 1997).

xresults
Enclosures with carp had a different water chemistry and temperature than no- carp enclosures. Carp enclosures were more turbid, had higher concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus, and lower pH compared to enclosures without carp (Table 2, Fig. 1 A – C, E). An increase in phytoplankton biomass was alsoassociated with the presence of carp (Table 2, Fig. 1 F). The water quality ef- fects of carp also became more apparent by day 53, except in the case of total nitrogen (Table 2, Fig. 1 A – F). Often the response of water quality variables to carp was complex. One of, or a combination of either carp presence, large carp or carp at higher densities caused a significant effect (Figs. 1 A – F, 2 A – D).The effects of carp on turbidity, and to a lesser extent, conductivity were the most consistently significant carp impacts on water quality across treatments and time (Table 2). Impacts on other water quality variables were more varia- ble. Turbidity was generally higher in all treatments by day 53 (Fig. 1 A). Carp enclosures had higher turbidity than no-fish enclosures, particularly by day 53 (Fig. 1 A). More specifically, large carp at high densities caused the highest turbidities (Fig. 2 A). Large carp, and higher density carp treatments also had higher conductivities (Fig. 2 B). Conductivity was lower at day 53 than at day 23 (140 versus 160 μS/cm, LSD = 20 μS/cm), but there was no significant in- teraction between this time effect and carp effects (Table 2). Higher density carp treatments were cooler at 0.05 m below the water surface than low-den- sity carp treatments. This temperature difference was more marked by day 53when temperatures were higher overall (Table 2, Fig. 1 D). Carp size and bio- mass density affected pH, and carp effects on pH interacted with time. Carp enclosures had a lower pH than no-fish enclosures (Table 2, Figs. 1 E and 2 D). pH was also generally higher by day 53 (Table 2, Fig. 1 E). By day 53, large carp treatments had a higher pH than small carp treatments (means of 7.15 versus 7.34, respectively, LSD = 0.14). High density treatments had a lower pH than low density treatments (7.05 versus 7.18, respectively, LSD = 0.1), tending towards a neutral pH (Table 2, Fig. 2 D).Carp increased the concentration of nutrients in the water column. Enclosu- res with carp had higher total phosphorus concentrations (Table 2, Figs. 1 C and 2 C). For days 23 and 53 collectively, the concentration of total phospho- rus was not significantly different between high and low densities of carp. En- closures with higher biomass densities of carp had, however, more total phos- phorus than lower densities by day 53 (Table 2, Fig. 1 C). Large carp enclosu- res were associated with more phosphorus than small carp (Table 2, Fig. 2 C). The concentration of total nitrogen was higher in the presence of carp (Fig. 1 B), and (marginally, P = 0.053) with higher densities of carp (Table 2). There was, however, no evidence of carp size effects on total nitrogen (P = 0.69).Carp presence and carp size, but not carp density, affected the concentration of chlorophyll-a in the water column. Chlorophyll-a was higher in carp enclo- sures, particularly in treatments with large carp, and by day 53 when chloro- phyll-a was generally higher among all treatments (Table 2, Fig. 1 F). The ef- fect of carp density on total algal abundance was highly non-significant (P = 0.74). Interactions of density with all other effects were also not significant (P > 0.3 in all cases).Mean values for mixed-size intermediate-density treatments tended to be intermediate between but not significantly different to values for large and small carp treatments (pH, chlorophyll-a, turbidity, conductivity and phospho- rus, Table 2, Figs. 1 E – F, 2 A – C), and also high density and low density treat- ments (phosphorus, turbidity, conductivity and pH, Figs. 1 C, 2 A, B and D). The exception to this was nitrogen. Treatments that had a mixture of both small and large carp had higher total nitrogen than single size class treatments (Table 2, Fig. 1 B). This pattern was also unusual in that the strongest differ- ences among treatments were apparent at day 23 (Fig. 1 B).In contrast to other water quality variables, dissolved oxygen was not sig- nificantly affected by carp presence, density or size (Table 2). However, dis- solved oxygen was higher by day 53 (means of 2.74 and 5.16 mg/l for days 23 and 53 respectively, LSD = 0.52 mg/l).Observations and photographs of enclosures at day 53 indicated that the emergent and floating vegetation community was dominated by Cyperus erag- rostis, to a lesser extent by Rumex crispus, green algae (probably Nitella sp.) and small floating leaves (probably Potamogeton sp.). By day 53 there was agreater percentage cover of emergent and floating vegetation in no fish com- pared to carp enclosures (respective median and ranges for Braun-Blanquet scores = 1 and 0, and 0–3 and 0–2; Mann-Whitney U-test statistic 61.5, P = 0.045).

xdiscussion
Carp size and biomass density effects on water qualityAs predicted, this study shows that both carp size and carp biomass density in- fluence water quality. The water quality effects were strongly associated with sediment suspension. In particular, an influx of sediments and associated dis- solved chemicals into the water column was indicated by the similarity of tur- bidity, phosphorus and conductivity responses to carp (Fig. 1 A – C). Addition- ally, the lower temperatures in high-density carp enclosures suggested the in- flux of sediments reduced light penetration. These findings are consistent with studies (e. g. Meijer et al. 1990, Breukelaar et al. 1994, Cline et al. 1994, King et al. 1997, Lougheed et al. 1998, Parkos et al. 2003) that show ben- thivores impact on a variety of variables, and most of the physical and chem- ical changes are strongly associated with sediment resuspension. Unfortu- nately, precise comparisons of the impact of carp size on water quality are limited by inconsistent reporting of carp sizes and the great variation in the size of carp in comparable experiments (Driver 2002).Responses of nutrients to carp size and biomass densityComparisons between this study and other benthivore studies suggest that phosphorus regeneration was primarily through sediment resuspension in this experiment, and this effect was more pronounced with larger carp. Larger fish retain more phosphorus per unit weight, have lower mass-specific ingestion rates and, consequently, exhibit lower mass-specific phosphorus excretion rates (Lamarra 1975, Vanni 1996). Nevertheless, the larger carp in our ex- periment mobilize more phosphorous per unit weight compared to the smaller carp, which suggests a different pathway for phosphorus mobilization. For large carp the evidence for the mobilization of sediment-bound phosphorus is compelling given the close relationships among turbidity, phosphorus and chlorophyll-a. Other studies that have used large carp (>2kg) or other large benthivores have demonstrated similar responses of turbidity, phosphorous and chlorophyll-a (Havens 1993, King et al. 1997, Parkos et al. 2003). Con- versely, studies on small carp ( ≤ 0.2 kg, Lamarra 1975, Qin & Threlkeld 1990, Richardson et al. 1990), or equally small benthivores with potentially similar effects such as the detritivorous gizzard shad (Dorosoma cepedianum,Schaus & Vanni 2000), suggest that fish contribute phosphorus via excre- tion. These differences are not surprising, because smaller benthivores tend to be more zooplanktivorous (Lammens & Hoogenboezem 1991, Yako et al. 1996). In contrast, large invertebrate-feeding benthivores such as adult carp and bream (Abramis brama) feed largely on dipteran larvae, causing bioturba- tion down to a sediment depth of about 12 cm (Alikunhi 1966, Lammens & Hoogenboezem 1991). Analogously, the mixing of sediments can increase the release of nutrients (Hrbácˇek & Prochazkova 1975).Regeneration of nitrogen by carp in this study was, in contrast to effects on phosphorus, probably mostly from excretion. There were no size effects, sug- gesting that carp size effects on nitrogen because of sediment suspension are unimportant; at least for the carp sizes used. Rates of nitrogen excretion are probably also not strongly affected by fish size (Vanni 1996). Conversely, the biomass of carp had a marginal positive effect on nitrogen (nitrites and ni- trates), and pH was lower with high biomass densities of carp. It is likely these biomass effects represented carp impacts on total nitrogen because other stud- ies have found significant responses of ammonia (Lougheed et al. 1998) or total nitrogen (Cline et al. 1994) in relation to carp biomass. These findings from other studies are consistent with this Australian study because ammonia is the main form of nitrogen excreted by fish (Braband et al. 1990). Most am- monia is usually rapidly converted to ammonium, and then converted to nitri- tes or nitrates through nitrification by microbes (Forsberg 1989, Newbold 1996). Furthermore, these other studies probably had a greater chance of de- tecting carp effects on nitrogen, because the background levels of nitrogen they measured were much lower. The maximum of 0.5 mg/l measured for any form of nitrogen in these two studies was routinely exceeded in this Australian experiment (cf. Fig. 1 B). Additionally, Cline et al. (1994) and Lougheed et al. (1998) used larger biomass densities of carp (>2000kg ha–1).Effects of more than one carp size on water qualityThese results provided little support for the initial hypothesis that the effect of combining carp sizes would be to reduce bottom-up effects. Generally the in- termediate-biomass, mixed-size treatments were not significantly different in water quality responses to single size treatments. The effects of mixed-size treatments on water quality tended to be intermediate between large and small carp treatments. That is, the sediment suspension effects of both carp size and density were generally more additive than interactive.There was evidence, however, that interactions between the two carp sizes enhanced nitrogen excretion by carp. If partitioning of prey or habitat use oc- curred between size classes of carp in mixed size treatments this could facili- tate more efficient prey consumption and more excretory products per unit fishweight. Combined carp sizes had a nitrogen value higher than both single size treatments at day 23 when the size differences between the ‘small’ and ‘large’ carp were greatest (Fig. 1 B). Furthermore, there was evidence of predation on the large zooplankton Daphnia by small carp, but not large carp, at day 23 (Driver 2002). Conversely, small carp had a lower impact on the numbers of the most abundant dipteran, the tribe Tanytarsini, over days 23 and 53 (Dri- ver 2002). If prey or habitat use was different between the two sizes of carp, then this could have been a result of competitive interactions among cohorts; as has been observed for other fish species (e. g. Persson 1983, Persson 1985 for Perca fluviatilis). Alternatively, or additionally, the different sizes of carp were merely feeding as they would if they were separate, and the differences in feeding were a consequence of age- or size-specific diets. Both scenarios are credible because facultative zooplanktivory, and decreasing zooplankti- vory with increasing age are common among benthivores (Lammens & Hoo- genboezem 1991, Yako et al. 1996). Either way, this carp size-interaction ef- fect on total nitrogen indicates previous estimates of benthivore effects on to- tal nitrogen, which do not incorporate the effects of intraspecific interactions (e. g. Vanni 1996), could be too simplistic, particularly for carp and its eco- logical analogues.ConclusionThe measurement of both fish size and density is critical for quantifying the changes in water quality caused by benthivores. Differences in effects were found among carp typically assumed to be ecologically similar. However, carp size is usually poorly described and reported inconsistently in carp studies. This study indicates that differences in carp size explain some of the conflict- ing results among carp studies. Such benthivore size-class interaction effects between two adult size classes, and also the interaction between density and size (as opposed to just additive effects) determined using robust experimental design, have not been previously described. This study indicates that large carp have a greater role in sediment and phosphorus suspension. The re- sponses of nitrogen to carp show that carp biomass, and interactions between carp size classes, affect nitrogen concentrations. These interactions among carp and water quality variables indicate that studies of benthivore-ecosystem interactions that do not consider benthivore size could produce results that are largely inexplicable.
