xabstract
The effects of nutrient enrichment on aquatic ecosystems have been well documented, but less is known about how these effects vary in response to additional stressors. I used experimental mesocosms to assess how nutrient enrichment affected zooplankton density and community structure in the presence and absence of invasive zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha). The density of several pelagic zooplankton taxa increased in response to nutrient enrichment, but these increases were offset or reduced in mesocosms that contained zebra mussels. At least at the beginning of the experiment, zebra mussels reduced the amount of algae that developed in response to nutrient enrichment and potentially were in competition with pelagic zooplankton. In contrast, zebra mussels did not reduce the total density of zooplankton in the absence of nutrient enrichment. Instead, the density of several littoral taxa increased in mesocosms with zebra mussels, presumably because they were able to use attached algae that also developed in mesocosms with zebra mussels. Combined, these results suggest that the overall effects of nutrient enrichment on plankton communities should be considered in the context of multiple stressors including the presence or absence of invasive species.

xintroduction
The effects of nutrient enrichment on aquatic ecosys- tems have been well documented (Smith 2003, Smith and Schindler 2009). In general, strong relationships exist between nutrients (mainly studied as P) and the biomass of phytoplankton (Smith 2003) and zooplank- ton (Hanson and Peters 1984, Pace 1986). Nutrients also affect the composition of plankton because cyanobacte- ria (e.g., Downing et al. 2001) and zooplankton taxa, such as Chydorus spp. (e.g., Lennon et al. 2003), tend to increase in biomass or relative biomass at high levels of enrichment. However, how additional stressors affect plankton responses to nutrient enrichment is less well understood (Smith and Schindler 2009).
Invasive species are important stressors in most aquatic ecosystems (Strayer 2010), and their presence may influence how plankton respond to nutrient enrichment. This effect may be strong for the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha), which has affected freshwater ecosystems in several important ways since invading North America in the 1980s (Carlton 2008). In a recent meta-analysis of studies from the USA and Eurasia, Higgins and Vander Zanden (2010) found that zebra mussels consistently decreasedwater-column phytoplankton 35 to 78% and zoo- plankton biomass 40 to 77% in pelagic habitats. Zebra mussels can greatly reduce algal biomass, alter phytoplankton species composition (Vanderploeg et al. 2001, Raikow et al. 2004, Sarnelle et al. 2005), and graze on small zooplankton (MacIsaac et al. 1991, 1995, Pace et al. 1998). These results suggest that plankton may respond very differently to nutrient enrichment depending on whether zebra mussels are present or absent from a system.
By reducing algal biomass and increasing water clarity, zebra mussels have helped to shift primary production from pelagic to littoral–benthic regions in a number of invaded ecosystems (Strayer 2009, Higgins and Vander Zanden 2010). The biomass of macrophytes and benthic algae has increased 170 to 180% after zebra mussel invasion (Higgins and Vander Zanden 2010). The changes in the physical structure of aquatic ecosystems have led to increases in benthic bacteria and zoobenthos (Higgins and Vander Zanden 2010). Increases in attached algae could also lead to increases in the density or relative abundance of littoral zooplankton taxa because they can consume filamentous algae or associated detritus (Fulton 1988, Fryer 1991).Dzialowski and Jessie (2009) showed that zebra mussels could mask the increasing effects of P enrichment on algal biomass in small mesocosms. P enrichment increased algal biomass in mesocosms without zebra mussels, but not in mesocosms that contained zebra mussels. The purpose of my study was to build upon this previous research and assess how zebra mussels affect zooplankton responses to nutrient enrichment. I used experimental mesocosms to cross 2 stressor treatments that included a single pulse of nutrients (either P, N, or both) and the presence or absence of zebra mussels. Once the treatments were established, I collected zooplankton from several local ponds and reservoirs and added them to the mesocosms so that communities could sort and assemble in response to the experimental treatments.
I predicted that algal biomass and zooplankton abundance would increase in response to nutrient enrichment (Hanson and Peters 1984, Pace 1986) but that these increases would be lower in mesocosms that also had zebra mussels (Dzialowski and Jessie 2009). I predicted that different zooplankton commu- nities would develop in response to the nutrient enrichment and zebra-mussel treatments because I used zooplankton from several different habitat types (littoral and pelagic). I expected mesocosms with zebra mussels to have a greater density of littoral zooplankton than mesocosms without zebra mussels based on results of previous studies showing that other littoral/benthic organisms (zoobenthos and attached algae) increase following zebra mussel invasion (e.g., Higgins and Vander Zanden 2010). When both stressors were present, I predicted that zebra mussels would reduce the effects of nutrient enrichment, thereby leading to communities resem- bling those that developed in response to zebra mussel treatment alone.

xmethods
I filled a series of 24 white polyethylene mesocosms (0.45 m diameter 3 0.5 m high) with 75 L of coarsely filtered reservoir water (243 mm) that was collected from just below the surface of Lake Carl Blackwell, a eutrophic reservoir 6.4 km west of Stillwater, Okla- homa (USA). I exposed each mesocosm to a 16:8-h light:dark cycle provided by an attached bank of fluorescent lights and allowed the mesocosms to equilibrate for ,1 wk before establishing the exper- imental treatments described below. I housed the mesocosms in an indoor laboratory at 24 6 2uC.Experimental treatments
I established 4 nutrient-enrichment treatments by adding no nutrients (control [cont]), a single pulse of N (+N; 1400 mg/L as KNO3), P (+P; 200 mg/L as KH2PO4), or both (+NP; same concentrations as in the single-nutrient treatments) to the mesocosms. The effects of P on freshwater ecosystems have been long recognized, but regional (Dzialowski et al. 2005) and global (Elser et al. 2007) research has highlighted the importance of N limitation or N and P colimitation in freshwater systems. Therefore, I used the +N and +NP treatments to assess whether algal production was limited by N or colimited by N and P in the mesocosms.
I crossed a zebra mussel treatment with the nutrient-enrichment treatments by adding 25 zebra mussels (1.0–1.5 cm in length) to 1⁄2 of the mesocosms (+ZM) but not to the other 1⁄2 (2ZM). Zebra mussel densities in experimental mesocosms are difficult to equate to mussel densities in natural systems. Stocking mesocosms with mussel densities based on areal estimates in natural systems (e.g., mussel/m2) may greatly overestimate zebra mussel effects be- cause densities vary spatially within systems, and the volume of water overlying the mussels is generally much larger in natural systems than in mesocosms. Therefore, I used a volumetric stocking density (0.33 mussels/L) that was within the range of volumetric densities previously reported for zebra mussels in natural systems (0–1.0/L; Mellina et al. 1995) and within a range of densities used in previous mesocosm studies. I collected the zebra mussels from Sooner Lake, Oklahoma, and returned them to the laboratory where I brushed them gently to remove most attached algae. I added the mussels to the mesocosms within 4 h of collection. I replicated each of the 8 treatments (cont, +P, +N, +NP, +ZM, +ZM+P, +ZM+N, +ZM+NP) in 3 mesocosms.
I inoculated the 24 mesocosms with an assemblage of zooplankton 5 d after the treatments were established (day 1). I collected zooplankton from several local ponds (littoral habitats) and reservoirs (pelagic habi- tats) near Stillwater with a 240-mm plankton net. I calculated the volume of water sampled from each source habitat and combined the zooplankton in a single container. I added zooplankton to each meso- cosm within 4 h of collection at a density similar to the average density in the source habitats.
Mesocosm sampling
I collected 1-L water samples from just below the surface of each mesocosm at ,1-wk intervals for analysis of water-column chlorophyll a, which I usedas an estimate of algal biomass. I filtered the water samples onto glass-fiber filters and froze the filters until the end of the experiment when I placed the filters in 90% acetone for 24 h and measured chlorophyll a fluorometrically after acidification on a Turner Fluorometer (Trilogy; Turner, Sunnyvale, California; APHA 2005).
I collected zooplankton samples from each meso- cosm on day 28 after stirring each mesocosm gently. I used a depth-integrated polyvinyl chloride tube sampler to collect 8 samples from each mesocosm. I combined the samples (6 L total), filtered the combined sample through a 243-mm mesh filter, and preserved it in ,75% ethanol. I identified cladocerans to species when possible and copepods to suborder (calanoid or cyclopoid).
Visual inspection of the zebra mussels at the end of the experiment suggested that mussels were still alive (shells were intact and siphons were extended) but did not provide quantitative data on survival rates. The inspection also revealed apparent differences in the amount of attached or filamentous algae on the bottom and side walls of the mesocosms. The biomass of attached algae appeared to be greater in +ZM treatments than in 2ZM treatments. Therefore, after I collected the 1-L grab sample, I stirred each mesocosm vigorously to dislodge and suspend the attached or filamentous algae and collected a second 1-L grab sample. I processed the 2nd sample as described above, and estimated the amount of attached algae in each mesocosm as the difference between the chlorophyll a content of 1st (water column) and 2nd (water column and attached/filamentous algae) grab samples.
Statistical analyses
Chlorophyll a.—I used 2-way repeated measures analysis of variance (rmANOVA) to test for effects of nutrient (cont, +N, +P, and +NP) and zebra mussel (+ZM, 2ZM) treatments on algal biomass. When I detected significant treatment effects or interactions, I used Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) tests (p , 0.05) to identify which treatments differed. Multiple-factor rmANOVA provides statistical results for a number of potential comparisons within and among treatments over time, so I focused on several specific comparisons with respect to chlorophyll a. First, if the nutrient effect was significant, I compared algal biomass in cont, +N, +P, and +NP treatments to assess what nutrient was limiting in the absence of zebra mussels. Second, if the zebra mussel effect was significant, I compared algal biomass in +ZM and cont treatments to assess how zebra mussels affected algal biomass in the absence of nutrient additions. Last, ifthe nutrient 3 zebra mussel effect was significant, I compared algal biomass in mesocosms that received nutrients (+N, +P, +NP) between +ZM and 2ZM treatments to assess whether algal responses to nutrient enrichment differed in the presence and absence of zebra mussels.
I used 2-way ANOVA to test for effects of nutrient and zebra mussel treatments on the biomass of attached algae that developed in the mesocosms. I used Tukey’s HSD tests (p , 0.05) to identify treatments that differed when the nutrient effects or the nutrient 3 zebra mussel interaction were significant.
Zooplankton.—I used 2-way ANOVAs to test for the effects of nutrient and zebra mussel treatments on the total density of zooplankton and the densities of individual taxa. I log10(x + 1)-transformed the data to meet the assumptions of normality. I used Tukey’s HSD (p , 0.05) tests to identify treatments that differed when the nutrient effects or the nutrient 3 zebra mussel interaction were significant.
I used nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) to assess differences in zooplankton communities that developed in response to the nutrient and zebra- mussel treatments. I used Sørensen (Bray–Curtis) distance measures and log10(x + 1)-transformed zoo- plankton density data. I ran this analysis in PC-ORD (version 5.14; MjM Software, Gleneden Beach, Oregon; McCune and Mefford 2006) in Autopilot mode (50 runs of real data and 50 runs of random data).

xresults
Experimental treatments and nutrient limitation
Nutrient enrichment significantly affected algal biomass (rmANOVA, F1,20 = 24.55, p , 0.001). Algal biomass was significantly greater in the +P and +NP treatments than in the cont and +N treatments, but did not differ between the cont and +N treatments or between the +NP and +P treatments (Tukey’s multiple comparisons tests, p . 0.05; Fig. 1). Thus, primary production appeared to be P-limited in the meso- cosms. Because N did not influence algal biomass, I combined replicates from the cont and +N treatments into 1 treatment group (CON, n = 6) and replicates from the +P and +NP treatments into 1 treatment group (+NUT, n = 6). I also combined data for mesocosms in the zebra mussel treatments. I com- bined replicates from the +ZM and +N+ZM treatment (+ZM, n = 6) and replicates from the +P+ZM and +NP+ZM treatments (+NUT+ZM, n = 6). I used data from these 4 combined treatments in statistical analyses as described above.Chlorophyll a
Nutrient enrichment affected algal biomass posi- tively (rmANOVA, F1,20 = 56.30, p , 0.001). Chloro- phyll a concentrations were significantly higher in the +NUT treatment than they were in the CON treatment on the first 3 sampling dates (Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 2A). In contrast, zebra mussels affected algal biomass negatively, but chlorophyll a concentrations were significantly lower in the +ZM treatment relative to the CON treatment only on day 7 (Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 2B). Chlorophyll a concentrations also were generally lower in the +NUT+ZM treatment than in the +NUT treatment, but the difference was significant only on day 1 (Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig.2C). Attached algae increased in the +ZM treatment, but not in the +NUT+ZM treatment (2- way ANOVA, NUT 3 ZM interaction, F1,20 = 4.365, p = 0.05; Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 3).
Zooplankton
Zooplankton density was significantly greater in the +NUT treatment than in the CON treatment (Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 4). Zebra mussels alone did not affect total zooplankton density (2-way ANOVA, F1,20 = 2.137, p = 0.159), but they did influence how zooplankton responded to nutrient enrichment. Zooplankton density was significantly lower in the +ZM+NUT than in the +NUT treatment (2-way ANOVA, nutrient 3 zebra mussel interaction, F1,20 = 5.664, p = 0.027; Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 4). The effects of zebra mussels on zooplankton responsesto nutrient enrichment were further evident in the comparisons of individual taxa. The density of several taxa (Bosmina sp., Ceriodaphnia sp., Daphnia sp., Diaphanosoma sp., copepods) increased in response to nutrient enrichment, but not when zebra mussels were present (+NUT+ZM treatment, Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 5). In the absence of nutrient enrichment, zebra mussels had a negative effect on the density of Diaphanosoma, but positive effects on Chydorus sp. and Scapholeberis sp. (+ZM treatment, Tukey’s HSD, p , 0.05; Fig. 5).
The NMDS showed that zebra mussels altered how zooplankton responded to nutrient enrichment (Fig. 6). I selected a 3-dimensional representation of the zooplankton community data with a final stress of 9.56. Zooplankton were separated along NMDS axis 1. Mesocosms from the +NUT treatment had higher densities of Daphnia sp., Bosmina sp., Ceriodaphnia sp., and Diaphanosoma sp. than mesocosms from the +NUT+ZM treatment. Furthermore, mesocosms from the +NUT+ZM treatment grouped more closely along axis 1 with mesocosms from the +ZM treatment than they did with mesocosms from the +NUT treatment (Fig. 6).

xdiscussion
Zebra mussels influenced how zooplankton responded to nutrient enrichment. Zooplankton density increased following enrichment (+NUT treatment), but did not increase when zebra mussels were present (+NUT+ ZM treatment). Furthermore, different communitiesdeveloped in mesocosms that received nutrient enrich- ment depending on whether zebra mussels were present or absent. The densities of 4 taxa that are generally pelagic in lakes and reservoirs increased following nutrient enrichment (Bosmina sp., Ceriodaphnia sp., Daphnia sp., and Diaphanosoma sp.). However, the density of these taxa did not increase following enrichment in mesocosms that also contained zebra mussels. Zebra mussels can affect zooplankton directly through predation, but the macro- zooplankton taxa shown in Fig. 5 are large enough that they probably were not directly predated by zebra mussels (MacIsaac et al. 1991, 1995). Instead, these 4 taxa probably competed with zebra mussels for water-column phytoplankton in the mesocosms, at least at the start of the experiment. Kissman et al. (2010) reported that Daphnia sp. were significantly less abundant in invaded Michigan lakes than they were in noninvaded lakes, and Jack and Thorpe (2000) reported that Bosmina sp. and Diaphanosoma sp. were significantly less abundant in zebra-mussel enclosures than in zebra-mussel-free enclo- sures in the Ohio River. Authors of both of these studies hypothesized that zooplankton declined because of competition with zebra mussels. My research builds upon these previous studies, and my results suggest that zebra mussels may directly reduce or offset the increasing effects of external nutrient loading on zooplankton density in invaded lakes and reservoirs. Zebra mussels reduced or offset the increase in algal biomass that resulted from nutrient enrichment only at the beginning of the experiment, but this offset appeared to result in significant declines in the density of several pelagic taxa in +ZM mesocosms.Zebra mussels did not reduce the total density of zooplankton in the absence of nutrient enrichment (+ZM treatment vs CON). The density of Diaphano- soma sp. was reduced in the +ZM treatment, but zebra
mussels had positive effects on the density of Chydorus sp. and Scapholeberis sp. Unlike the taxa that were negatively affected by zebra mussels (discussed above), Chydorus sp. and Scapholeberis sp. are generallylittoral and may have benefited from the attached algae that developed in the +ZM mesocosms. Attached or benthic algae consistently increase following zebra mussel invasions in experimental and natural systems (Higgins and Vander Zanden 2010). For example, Wojtal-Frankiewicz and Frankiewicz (2011) reported that zebra mussels increased the abundance of attached algae when blooms of Hydrodictyon reticula- tum formed on the walls of their mesocosms after 3 to 4 wk. Zebra mussels can recycle large concentrations of nutrients back into the water column (e.g., Arnott and Vanni 1996), which, combined with high grazing pressure on planktonic algae, may facilitate growth by attached algae in the mesocosms. However, the effect of zebra mussels on attached algae was context dependent, and attached algae did not increase in zebra mussel mesocosms that also received nutrient enrichment (+NUT+ZM). Why the effects of zebra mussels on attached algae were context dependent is not clear, but this response was clear and consistent only in the +ZM treatment. Additional research is needed to better understand the interaction among zebra mussels, nutrient cycling and enrichment, and attached algae.
Increases in the biomass of attached algae in the +ZM treatment may have provided important habitat or resources for littoral zooplankton. Unlike pelagic zooplankton, littoral zooplankton tend to be both filter feeders and scrapers. Therefore, they are able touse water-column algae, as well as attached algae and associated detritus (Fryer 1991). For example, Chy- dorus sp. can attach to filamentous algae and uses its thoracic legs to scrape algae or detritus (Balcer et al. 1984, Smith 2001). A large body of research has shown that zebra mussels can facilitate increases in the biomass/abundance of benthic algae, bacteria, and macroinvertebrates (Higgins and Vander Zanden 2010), but my results further suggest that the density of at least some littoral zooplankton also may increase following zebra mussel invasion.
Zebra mussels influenced how plankton responded to nutrient enrichment, but my study was not designed to address how these 2 stressors influenced phytoplankton species composition. Both nutrient enrichment and zebra mussels have the potential to facilitate increases in the biomass or relative biomass of Cyanobacteria. Cyanobacterial biovolume or rela- tive abundance tend to increase with increasing P enrichment (Downing et al. 2001) and with invasion of zebra mussels in some systems (Dionisio Pires et al. 2005, Sarnelle et al. 2005, Juhel et al. 2006, Vander- ploeg et al. 2009). Thus, zebra mussels can influence how phytoplankton biomass responds to nutrient enrichment, and they may help to shift communities toward dominance by Cyanobacteria that are resistant to zebra-mussel grazing and are favored under nutrient enrichment, but are a poor food resource for some zooplankton (Lampert 1987). Additional studies are needed to understand how nutrient enrichment and zebra mussels interact to influence phytoplankton species composition and how these changes may, in turn, influence zooplankton commu- nity responses to nutrient enrichment.
The ability of zebra mussels to reduce chlorophyll a concentrations was less than predicted based on the meta-analysis by Higgins and Vander Zanden (2010) and the experimental results from Dzialowski and Jessie (2009). Dzialowski and Jessie (2009) found that a pulse of P (150 mg/L) resulted in a significant increase in algal biomass (measured as relative fluorescence). However, when zebra mussels were present algal biomass did not differ between control mesocosms and those with both nutrients and zebra mussels. In my study, zebra mussels only delayed the increase in algal biomass following nutrient enrichment in the +P+ZM treatment. Differences in the magnitude of zebra-mussel effects between my study and Dzia- lowski and Jessie (2009) may have resulted from differences in experimental design. For example, their mesocosms were smaller (18 L), and they were stocked with a higher density of zebra mussels than in my study (1/L vs 0.33/L). Therefore, the density of zebra mussels in a system and their access to thewater column probably will affect how zebra mussels influence plankton responses to nutrient enrichment within individual systems. Furthermore, my use of experimental mesocosms did not allow evaluation of several factors that could potentially influence how zebra mussels affect plankton responses to nutrients. For example, benthic–pelagic coupling, lake mixing, and the presence of additional trophic levels includ- ing grazers and predators all could potentially influence how zebra mussels affect plankton res- ponses to nutrient enrichment in more complex systems (see Comment by Conroy 2010 and Reply by Dzialowski and Jessie 2010 for further discussion on extrapolating results from zebra-mussel mesocosm studies to natural systems). Consideration of these factors will be important in deciding how the results of my study scale to more natural systems. My study provides several hypotheses that can be directly tested in whole lakes or reservoirs (discussed below).
Conclusion
My study expands on previous research by show- ing that zooplankton may respond very differently to nutrient enrichment depending on whether zebra mussels are present or absent. The density of several pelagic taxa increased in response to nutrient enrich- ment, but these increases were offset or reduced in magnitude when zebra mussels were present. Surveys of lakes with and without zebra mussels following nutrient loading events (e.g., storm runoff) could be used to test this hypothesis in more natural systems. Zebra mussels also altered zooplankton community structure. In contrast to expectations, zebra mussels did not reduce the density of zooplankton in the absence of nutrient enrichment. Instead, the density of several littoral taxa increased in mesocosms with zebra mussels. Shifts towards greater densities of littoral–benthic organisms are common following zebra-mussel invasions, and my results suggest that littoral zooplankton may benefit from invasion as well. Therefore, the overall effect of zebra mussels on zooplankton responses to nutrient enrichment may vary in invaded systems with decreases in pelagic zooplankton but increases in littoral zooplankton. Targeted surveys of pelagic and littoral regions of lakes with and without zebra mussels could be used to test this hypothesis. My results suggest that the effects of nutrient enrichment on aquatic ecosystems may differ widely depending on whether zebra mussels are present or absent in a system. Thus, the effects of nutrient enrichment should be considered in the context of additional stressors including invasive species.
