xabstract
The conspicuous shifts in summertime values of com- mon measures of water qualify that have persisted for 10 years (1993 to 2002) in the Seneca River, New York, as a result of the zebra mussel invasion are documented. Resolution of patterns in time and space is supported by water quality monitoring that extends back to the late 1970s. Patterns are evaluated to describe the stability of impacts and quantify metabolic activity of the invader. The water quality impacts that have persisted unabated for 10 years since the invasion are the most severe documented for a river in North America. Changes in summer median conditions since the invasion include: (1) a 16-fold decrease in chlorophyll con- centration (Chl), (2) a 2.5-fold increase in Secchi disc transparency, (3) a 17-fold increase in soluble reactive phosphorus concentration, (4) a 3.7-fold increase in total ammonia concentration, (5) a greater than 25 percent decrease in dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration, and (6) a decrease in pH of 0.55 units. The strength of these signa- tures has been driven by anthropogenic influences that include upstream nutrient loading and morphometric modifications of the river, and the functioning of Cross Lake, through which the river flows. This hypereutrophic lake sustains dense zebra mussel popu- lations and related water quality impacts in the river downstream of the lake outflow by acting as a source of veligers and suitable food for this bivalve. Evidence is presented that levels of metabolic activity of the zebra mussel in this river have been resource limit- ed, manifested through increased consumption of Chl and DO with increased delivery of these constituents in the lake's outflow.

xintroduction
Dense populations of the zebra mussel, Dreissena polymorpha (Pallas), have been demonstrated to cause major changes in common measures of water quality associated with various aspects of their metabolism. For example, decreases in concentrations of phytoplankton and tripton, and attendant increas- es of light penetration, as a result of filter feeding of this exotic invader, have been reported for a number of invaded sites (e.g., Reeders and Bij de Vaate, 1990; Holland, 1993; Leach, 1993; Ludyanskiy et al., 1993; Fahnenstiel et al., 1995; Howell et al., 1996; Caraco et al., 1997; Effler and Siegfried, 1998). Increases in ambient concentrations of ammonia (T-NH3, total) and dissolved phosphorus (P) have been attributed to excretion inputs from zebra mussels at several sites (e.g., Holland et al., 1995; Johengen et al., 1995; Melli- na et al., 1995; Arnott and Vanni, 1996; Effler et al., 1996b; Caraco et al., 1997; Effler et al., 1997; Effler and Siegfried, 1998). Oxygen depletion associated with respiration of this bivalve has been documented in three large rivers (Effler et al., 1996b; Effler and Siegfried, 1998, Caraco et al., 2000). These conspicu- ous impacts are explained by the very high areal material fluxes (mg/m2/d) and filtering rates (m3/m2/d) exerted at lake or river bottoms associated with dense populations of zebra mussels, consistent with the sessile habitat of this bivalve. Material flux- es from severe infestations have been found to be large (e.g., 10 times greater) compared to those associated with enriched sediments (Effler et al., 1997; Effler et al., 1998; Madon et al., 1998a).Most of the research to date documenting the impacts of the zebra mussel invasion of North America has focused on lentic systems (Strayer et al., 1996; Summers et al., 1996; Madon et al., 1998b), despite the advantages the simpler hydrodynamic regime of lotic systems offers for the resolution and quantification of the signatures of the metabolism of this invader (e.g., Effler et al., 1997). Zebra mussels face substantially different conditions in lotic environ- ments compared to lakes (Horvath et al., 1996; Madon et al., 1998b), including higher levels of inorganic par- ticles and turbulence (Alexander et al., 1994; Sum- mers et al., 1996). Madon et al. (1998b) contended that zebra mussels in rivers generally exhibit lower growth potential and tend to stabilize at lower popu- lation densities than observed in lakes because of reduced food quality associated with higher concen- trations of inorganic particles. Further, upstream sources of veligers are necessary to maintain popula- tions of this bivalve in most invaded lotic systems because of its planktonic form (Horvath et al., 1996; Stoeckel et al., 1997).
Patterns of common measures of water quality are evaluated over an approximately 15 km reach of the Seneca River, New York, and changes brought about by the zebra mussel invasion are identified, based on long term monitoring that extends from the late 1970s through 2002. Estimates of material fluxes are presented to characterize variations in features of zebra mussel metabolism and related drivers. The stability of the impacts is evaluated based on a decade
of post-invasion monitoring data. The roles an inter- vening lake and anthropogenic effects play in the river’s extreme response to the invasion are described.
STUDY SYSTEM
The Seneca River drains 9,000 km2 of the 13,200 km2 Oswego River basin of New York (Figure 1), including the Finger Lakes region. The Oswego River, formed by the combination of the Seneca and Oneida Rivers, is the second largest inflow into Lake Ontario, after the Niagara River. The Seneca River is an alka- line, hard water system (Effler et al., 1989). The study reach of the river extends (approximately 15 km) from a point 1.3 km downstream of Cross Lake to 2.1 km downstream of Baldwinsville, New York (Figure 1). The annual average flow at Baldwinsville reported by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) for the 1951 to 1991 period was 96.3 m3/s; the minimum average flow at this location for a 30-day period with a return fre- quency of 1 in 10 years (30Q10) is 17.6 m3/s. The esti- mated time of travel from Cross Lake to Baldwinsville at the 30Q10 flow is about 3.5 days (Schindel et al., 1977). Flow in the river is subject to substantial short term and interannual variations driven primarily by natural variability in rainfall that is common to the region (e.g., Effler and Whitehead, 1996).The “State Ditch Cut” (Cut) (Figure 1), a 1.7 km channel that represents the most upstream section of the study reach, is one of a number of anthropogenic alterations of the river (e.g., channelized, dams, and locks) to support navigation and hydroelectric power generation (Canale et al., 1995). The Cut carries more than 90 percent of the river flow, as the natural “horseshoe” river course (Figure 1) is largely silted in (unpublished flow measurements from the U.S. Geo- logical Survey, Ithaca, New York). The river bottom ranges in character from organic enriched fine sedi- ments to large rocks over the study reach. Rock, of cobble size or greater, covers most of the bottom of the Cut – though this has at times been partly modified by zebra mussel debris (e.g., shells) since the invasion (Effler et al., 1997). Generally, cobble size rocks make progressively less of a contribution, and sand and gravel more, moving downstream towards Bald- winsville (Effler and Siegfried, 1994). The mid- channel depth of the river (exclusive of Cross Lake) over the study reach is 4.5 to 5.5 m. The width of the river ranges from 30 m (in the Cut) to about 250 m. No point source waste inputs or significant tributaries enter the river over the study reach. Most of the river flow passes through a dam works in Baldwinsville and navigation in that portion of the river is main- tained by a lock. Colonization of the Seneca River by zebra mussels was first observed in 1991 (New York Sea Grant, 1998). Dense populations of the invader had developed by 1993 (Effler and Siegfried, 1994).
Cross Lake (volume of 50.8 x 106 m3, surface area of 9.0 km2, mean depth of 5.5 m) is a dimictic, cultur- ally hypereutrophic lake (Effler and Carter, 1987; Effler et al., 1989). More than 30 wastewater treat- ment plants discharge and substantial agricultural activity occurs within the basin upstream of the lake. The Seneca River inflow constitutes approximately 98 percent of the total flow received by Cross Lake (Effler and Carter, 1987). The average complete- mixed flushing rate of the lake is high, about 50 times per year. Water exits the lake from its epilimnion to downstream portions of the river. However, the out- flow at times does not represent lake wide conditions due to the occurrence of “short circuited” transport of the inflow to the lake outlet (particularly during high flow intervals) (e.g., Schindel et al., 1997).

xmethods
The assessment of impact of the invasion of zebra mussels on this river’s water quality is based on mea- surements of total P (TP), soluble reactive P (SRP), total ammonia (T-NH3), chlorophyll a (Chl), Secchi disc transparency (SD), dissolved oxygen (DO), and
pH at the sites bounding the study reach (Figure 1). Dissolved oxygen, pH, and temperature (T) measure- ments were made in the field with calibrated instru- mentation. Clarity was measured with a 20 cm diameter black and white quadrant Secchi disc. Chlorophyll was determined according to Parsons et al. (1984). The other analytes were measured accord- ing to standard methods: ascorbic acid method for P analyses and phenate method for T-NH3 (APHA, 1985, 1992, 1996). Samples were collected below the surface in most years (in 1988 and 1995 depth integrated samples were collected). Field measure- ments and samples were collected within the mid- morning to noontime interval since 1990. Only measurements for the June through September inter- val are utilized in this analysis, when water tempera- ture in the river is greater than or equal to 20 ̊C (Canale et al., 1995; Effler et al., 1997), and thus the metabolic activity of zebra mussels is high (Aldridge et al., 1995).
Data presented here draw primarily on long term studies conducted by the authors on this system (Table 1). This has been augmented (particularly before 1988) by data reported by the New York Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS- DEC) as part of an earlier monitoring program (Table 1). Largely because the zebra mussel invasion and its associated impacts were not anticipated, the available water quality record is uneven with respect to tempo- ral and spatial coverage (years and frequency of mea- surements), and parameters measured. Monitoring and analyte coverage has been more complete since the invasion (Table 1). Monitoring has generally been conducted weekly since the invasion. Inclusion of the earlier monitoring data of NYSDEC supports testing of the significance of changes in selected water quality characteristics since the zebra mussel invasion. The year of 1992 is adopted here as the transition from pre-invasion to post-invasion conditions in the river (i.e., 1991 represents conditions before and 1993 reflects conditions after) (e.g., Effler et al., 1996b).
Additionally, paired samples (subsurface) were col- lected upstream and downstream (“upstream bound- ary,” Figure 1) of Cross Lake for suspended solids analyses, including volatile (VSS) and nonvolatile or fixed (inorganic; FSS) fractions, in 2000, 2001, and 2002 to assess the effect of the lake on food quality for the zebra mussels. Food quality was represented by the ratio of concentrations of inorganic to organic sus- pended solids, described as the IO ratio (Madon et al., 1998b). Suspended solids analyses were conducted according to standard methods (APHA, 1992, 1996).
Increases or decreases in constituent mass per unit time over the study reach since the invasion are cal- culated as the product of stream flow (Q; m3/d) and difference in constituent concentrations over thebounds of the study reach (∆Cx; g/m3), with units of material loading rates (mass/time). Paired measure- ments for the boundaries of the study reach are not available in all years for all constituents. Data for 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 supported these calculations. Values of Q are daily average val- ues for the USGS gage at Baldwinsville. Alternative- ly, these gains or losses in mass are represented in terms of areal mass fluxes
where Chld and Chlu are the Chl values (g/m3) at the downstream and upstream boundaries, respectively.
Statistical analysis of data collected from environ- mental monitoring studies can be problematic (Hurlbert, 1984; Stewart-Oaten et al., 1986, 1992; Matthews et al., 2002). Unlike traditional experi- ments, monitoring studies often lack an a priori sta- tistical design and have no true replication (Hurlbert, 1984). The statistical difficulties associated with unanticipated perturbations (e.g., zebra mussel inva- sions) are particularly troublesome because replica- tion with randomly assigned treatments is usually impractical. Despite these difficulties, quantitative decision criteria regarding ecosystem impacts, deter- mined by appropriate statistical models and tech- niques, are widely desired.
The data set considered here consists of observa- tions on different parameters from different investiga- tors collected at different frequencies. The individual observations are likely spatially correlated, as data collected at the downstream site are influenced by upstream conditions. Further, bi-weekly observations probably contain some degree of temporal correlation. For these reasons it is inappropriate to use simple t-tests or analysis of variance (ANOVA) to compare populations of observations (e.g., pre-zebra mussel versus post-zebra mussel). Thus, a simple averaging scheme was used to generate an estimate of summer (June to September) average water quality conditions
J x = QA ( ∆ C x )
( 1 )
 where A is the bottom area of the river (m2). This nor- malization of the mass gains or losses by bottom area is mechanistically attractive, as it is consistent with the sessile habitat of the zebra mussel (Effler et al., 1996b, 1997). The value of Jx for DO losses is a mea- sure of zebra mussel oxygen demand (ZOD) as defined by Effler et al. (1996b). Similarly, estimates of the areal filtering (or grazing) rate [kf (m3/m2/d)] (Gelda and Effler, 2002a) of the invader can be made from paired Chl measurements at the bounds of the study reach, according tobefore and after the zebra mussel invasion at upstream and downstream locations.
The mean for each parameter (TP, SRP, T-NH3, Chl, SD, DO, pH) was calculated by year and site, and the means further averaged to produce one value per parameter per site for both before (1978 to 1992) and after (1993 to 2002) the zebra mussel invasion. Each year was weighted equally regardless of the number of observations. Differences among periods (pre- and post-zebra mussels) and sites (upstream and down- stream) were examined using two-way multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with the water quali- ty parameters as dependent variables and period and site as class variables. Yearly means were log trans- formed prior to analysis to stabilize variances. Multi- variate normality was evaluated using the Mardia coefficient of multivariate kurtosis. Following a signif- icant MANOVA, differences in mean values were eval- uated for each parameter using Tukey’s ‘honestly significant difference test.’ Stepwise discriminant function analysis was used to describe the water qual- ity features that differentiate the pre- and post-zebra mussel years. Factor structure coefficients are pre- sented to assist in interpretation of significant canoni- cal roots. All statistical analyses were performed using STATISTICA, Version 6 (StatSoft, Inc., 2003).

xresults
Water Quality, Before Versus After Invasion and IO Ratios
Changes in common measures of water quality in the Seneca River at the downstream boundary of the study reach since the zebra mussel invasion are illus- trated in distribution plots (Figure 2). This presenta- tion limits the pre-invasion measurements to the observations of 1990 and 1991, but inclusion of earlier NYSDEC observations (Table 1) does not change the character of the comparisons. Mean and median val- ues were found to track each other rather closely for all of these water quality parameters. Substantial to dramatic shifts in all of these measures of water qual- ity, except TP, have occurred since the zebra mussel invasion.
The median value of DO decreased from 7.2 mg/L (approximately 82 percent saturation, on average) before the invasion to 5.3 mg/L (approximately 60 per- cent saturation, on average) following the invasion (Figure 2a), representing a decrease of more than 25 percent. Nearly 40 percent of the post-invasion obser- vations were less than 5 mg/L, values lower than observed before the invasion. About 95 percent of
these observations occurred when Q was less than the 25th percentile for the June to September interval. The median pH value decreased from 8.10 to 7.55, with little overlap in observations for the pre-invasion and post-invasion intervals (Figure 2b). The median value of SD increased from 0.75 to 2.0 m following the invasion, a more than 2.5-fold increase (Figure 2c). The median Chl value decreased nearly 16-fold follow- ing the invasion, from 47.6 to 3.0 μg/L (Figure 2d). The distributions of TP concentrations for before and after the invasion where similar (Figure 2e); the median following the invasion was only 11 percent less. In sharp contrast, dramatic increases in the SRP fraction of the P pool have occurred since the invasion (Figure 2f), corresponding to a 17-fold increase. The contribution of SRP to TP increased from less than 5 percent to greater than 50 percent. The median value of T-NH3 increased by a factor 3.7 following the zebra mussel invasion (Figure 2g).
In sharp contrast, the distributions of these water quality parameters remained comparatively unchanged for the pre-invasion and post-invasion intervals at the upstream boundary of the study reach (Figure 3). These plots are scaled the same as the downstream distributions to support comparison. The pre-invasion distributions of Chl and SD are based on a single year of observations.
MANOVA was used to test the null hypothesis that there were no effects of period (pre-invasion versus post-invasion) or site (upstream and downstream) on summer means of the seven water quality variables (TP, SRP, T-NH3, Chl, SD, DO and pH). The normal- ized coefficient of multivariate kurtosis was -0.416 (p = 0.34), suggesting that these data do not violate the assumption of multivariate normality. Two-way MANOVA found significant (p < 0.001) effects for peri- od, site, and the interaction term (periodxsite). Tukey’s HSD (honestly significant difference) tests found significant differences between the pre-invasion (n = 12 years) and post-invasion (n = 10 years) inter- vals for all of the water quality variables for the downstream site (Table 2). The change observed for TP (-16 percent) was small compared to the other variables (Table 2). In contrast, no significant (p > 0.05) differences were found between the pre-invasion (n = 4 years) and post-invasion (n = 7 years) intervals for the upstream site, or between the two sites for the pre-invasion period.
Discriminant function analysis for the downstream site separated the pre-invasion and post-invasion years into two distinct groups, based on variations in the seven water quality variables (Figure 4a). The first discriminant function (Root 1) had a much larger eigenvalue than the second (Root 2) and is clearly the most important, as 98 percent of the discriminatory power was explained by this function (Table 3). Thefactor structure coefficients presented in Table 3 represent the correlations between the variables and the discriminant functions and are commonly used to interpret the meaning of discriminant functions. Root 1 was associated with high values for SRP,T-NH3, and SD and low values for Chl, DO, and pH (Table 3). Variations in TP had little influence on sep- aration of the pre-invasion and post-invasion years. Root 2 accounted for just 2 percent of the discrimina- tory power and the factor structure coefficientsprovided no clear interpretation for this function. Discriminant function analysis for the upstream site could not distinguish between the pre-invasion and post-invasion years (p = 0.18) (Figure 4b).Comparison of the distributions of the IO ratio for the Seneca River inflow to Cross Lake and export from this lake (Figure 5; upstream boundary of study reach) depicts a shift to lower values in the lake’s outflow. The median values for the upstream and downstream sites were 3.3 and 2.0, respectively. Twenty-two percent of the observations for the upstream site were less than 1.7, while 41 percent of the observations downstream were less than this value. The medians of the two populations were sig- nificantly different (Wilcoxon Matched Pairs Test, p < 0.0001).Stability and Levels of Metabolic Activity
Time series of mean annual values plus one stan- dard deviation as a measure of seasonal variability are presented for the various water quality parame- ters at the downstream boundary for the 1990 to 2002 interval (Figure 6; except 1992) to depict interannual variations and support identification of potential trends. Substantial interannual and shorter term variations have been observed for each of these met- rics since the invasion. The coefficient of variation (CV) of the annual means of the water quality param- eters since 1993 ranged from 11 percent for DO to 36 percent for Chl. These levels of interannual variabili- ty were all less than that observed for river flow (mean of daily average values for monitored days of each year, CV = 51 percent), suggesting some inde- pendence between water quality conditions and Q. Other than TP, yearly average values only approached pre-invasion conditions in the case of DO
(e.g., Figure 6a; 1996, 1998, and 2000). Relationships among the various water quality metrics since the invasion are presented as a correlation matrix (Table 4). Interannual variations in all the water quality metrics, except Chl and TP, were significantly (α = 0.05) correlated with variations in Q (Table 4). These relationships were positive for DO, pH, and 1/SD, and negative for SRP and T-NH3. Interannual variations in DO, pH, SRP, and T-NH3 were significantly corre- lated, as were the variations in TP and SRP (Table 4). Variations in Chl have not been significantly correlat- ed with those of any of the other water quality param- eters. No conspicuous long term trends in the monitored water quality characteristics are manifest- ed in the post-invasion data (Figures 6a through 6g).
Changes in water quality parameters across the study reach since the invasion, based on paired obser- vations, have generally been substantial and tempo- rally variable, as illustrated here for DO, Chl, SRP, and SD for 1994 (Figures 7a through 7d). The plots are presented as decreases in DO (Figure 7a) and Chl (Figure 7b) from upstream to downstream, and increases in SRP (Figure 7c) and SD (Figure 7d). The loss of DO over the reach increased strongly in July from less than 0.5 mg/L to greater than 4 mg/L (Fig- ure 7a), an interval of decreasing Q (Figure 7e). Dif- ferences in the other water quality metrics also increased across the reach over this interval (Figures 7b through 7d); e.g., increases in SRP less than 40 μg/L and SD of approximately 2 m were observed. Abrupt reductions in these longitudinal differences were observed for all of the metrics with the major increase in Q in late summer (Figure 7). Longitudinal differences increased again during the subsequent low Q interval in mid-September; DO decreased approximately 4 mg/L over the reach, Chl decreased less than 100 μg/L, and SD increased less than 2 m. Longitudinal differences decreased again in late September as Q increased.
Quite different temporal patterns emerge for corre- sponding estimates of fluxes for DO, Chl, and SRP (Figure 7). These fluxes accommodate prevailing Q as well as longitudinal differences in constituent concen- trations and thus reflect the mass of constituents lost or gained (Equation 1) over the reach. Substantial increases in fluxes were observed during the high Q intervals of early July and late August. These increas- es occurred despite relatively small concentration dif- ferences, reflecting the dominant effect of Q on the mass processed. The same picture would be portrayed by presenting losses and gains in terms of mass rates (kg/d), which eliminates the river bottom area embed- ded in the flux calculation (Equation 1).
The dependence of water quality indicators of zebra mussel metabolism on export from Cross Lake was evaluated based on the population of available pairedmeasurements for the study reach boundaries. Strong positive relationships were observed between the lake export rates, calculated as the product of river flow and concentration at the upstream boundary (Figure 1), and loss rates of mass over the study reach for DO (Figure 8a; r2 = 0.78, p < 0.0001) and Chl (Figure 8b; r2 = 0.90, p < 0.0001). The DO relationship is limited to values of Q less than or equal to the median for the June to September interval, corresponding to 89 per- cent of the available observations (i.e., low Qs over- represented in monitoring). Distinctly nonlinear and scattered behavior was observed for the higher flows. Alternatively, the DO loss is represented as an areal flux (Figure 8a, Y-axis on right); these values ranged from 0 to nearly 10 g/m2/d for this subset of observa- tions, and averaged 3.1 ± 0.5 g/m2/d (95 percent confi- dence interval). The components of DO export, Q and DO concentration, both contributed importantly to the observed DO loss rates, explaining 45 and 54 per- cent of the observed variations in mass decrease, respectively (separate linear least squares regression analyses). The relationship for Chl is based on all available paired observations. The percent removal of Chl exported from the lake over the study reach was usually high, exceeding 75 percent for nearly 85 per- cent of the paired observations (Figure 8b). A strong (r2 = 0.69, p < 0.0001) positive relationship between filtering rate and Chl load to the reach was also observed (Figure 8c). Differences in the strength of this relationship and that presented in Figure 8b are a manifestation of the differences in the treatment of the boundary observations in the calculations (Equa- tions 1 and 2).
A positive relationship (r2 = 0.55, p < 0.0001) was observed between the rates of gain in the mass of T-NH3 and SRP over the study reach (Figure 8d). According to linear least squares regression the slope (± 95 percent confidence interval) of this relationship was 3.1 ± 0.6 kg T-NH3/kg SRP and the intercept was not significantly different from zero. Strong relation- ships were not observed between water quality indica- tors of the different metabolic activities of the invader, on a concentration basis (e.g., decrease in DO versus decrease in Chl, increase in SRP versus decrease in Chl, and increase in SRP versus decrease in DO). However, stronger relationships emerged when these interactions were considered on a mass per unit time basis (Figures 8d, 8e, and 8f). Changes in SD (as 1/SD) were significantly, but weakly, related toChl(r2 =0.18,p=0.001)andQ(r2 =0.16,p= 0.009). A multiple linear regression model, that included both Chl and Q as independent variables,was substantially stronger (r2 = 0.34) and highly sig- nificant (p = 0.0003, overall).

xdiscussion

Water Quality Impacts of Zebra Mussel Invasion
The evidence is compelling that the changes in water quality characteristics of the Seneca River at Baldwinsville since the early 1990s (Figures 2 and 6) are a result of the zebra mussel invasion. First, the changes were temporally coincident with the inva- sion. Second, the features of the changes (Figures 2 and 6) are consistent with the metabolism of the zebra mussel (Schneider, 1992; Aldridge et al., 1995; Arnott and Vanni, 1996; Effler et al., 1996b; McMa- hon, 1996; Madon et al., 1998b;) and the character of observations reported for other invaded systems with dense populations (e.g., Holland, 1993; Leach, 1993; Fahnenstiel et al., 1995; Holland et al., 1995; Caraco et al., 1997, 2000). These changes reflect at least three features of the metabolism of the invader, including respiration (decreases in DO and pH), filter feeding (decreases in Chl and increases in SD), and excretion (increases in SRP and T-NH3). Third, manifestations of impacts were consistent with estimates of the fil- tering capacities of the resident zebra mussel popula- tions in the study reach; e.g., based on the benthic survey of 1994, Effler and Siegfried (1998) estimated that the median flow for the river for the June to September interval of that year was filtered twice over the study reach. Additionally, earlier estimates of biomass specific material fluxes determined from mass balance calculations made around the Cut (Effler and Siegfried, 1994; Effler et al., 1997, 1998) were consistent with published laboratory rates (Aldridge et al., 1995; Arnott and Vanni, 1996; Geldaet al., 2001). Further, application of a calibrated mechanistic model of DO and Chl for the reach (that accommodates multiple source and sink processes for both constituents) demonstrated zebra mussel metabolism (respiration and filtration) was the domi- nant loss (sink) process responsible for the observed reductions in these constituents over the study reach (Gelda and Effler, 2002a).
The zebra mussel invasion has converted the Seneca River at Baldwinsville from a low clarity, phy- toplankton rich, nutrient depleted system, with near- ly saturated oxygen concentrations, to a system with increased clarity, low phytoplankton levels, highly enriched in dissolved nutrients, with substantially undersaturated oxygen concentrations. These changes for this reach of the Seneca River are largely responsi- ble for shifts in water quality of similar character reported (Effler and Siegfried, 1998) for the mouth of the Oswego River and Oswego Harbor, more than 50 km downstream (Figure 1). The water quality impacts at Baldwinsville (Figures 2 and 6) caused by the zebra mussel invasion are the strongest documented for a
river in North America. This supports earlier specula- tion (Effler and Siegfried, 1994) that conditions in this system may approach a worst case, or end mem- ber, for water quality impacts of the invasion on a river. Conspicuous and persistent impacts of the inva- sion have also been reported for the Hudson River (Caraco et al., 1997, 2000), although the changes were less severe. For example, the relative decrease in Chl (approximately 10-fold), and increase in SRP (approx- imately 2-fold) and light penetration [assuming atten- uation coefficient is proportional to 1/SD (Effler, 1985); approximately 55 percent] in the Hudson River were not as great as reported here for the Seneca River. Further, no significant change in T-NH3 was reported for the Hudson, and the average decrease in DO was only approximately 1 mg/L. The greater impacts in the Seneca River can be attributed to: (1) higher concentrations of suitable food in the form of phytoplankton exiting Cross Lake (Caraco et al., 1997; Effler et al.,1989; Figure 3d), (2) higher popula- tion densities of the invader (Caraco et al., 1997; Effler and Siegfried, 1994, 1998), (3) more shallowdepth, and (4) greater impairment to reaeration from anthropogenic modification of river flow that exacer- bates DO impacts (Canale et al., 1995).
The degradation in the oxygen resources of the river is particularly problematic for management of oxygen demanding waste streams within the water- shed. Fifteen percent of the summertime observations at the lower boundary of the study reach since the invasion represent violations of the New York State standard of a minimum DO within a day of 4.0 mg/L (Figure 2a). This understates the severity of the pre- vailing conditions with respect to standards, which is more fully represented by hourly measurements (Effler et al., 1996b). Variations within a day occur that reflect photosynthetic activity; daily minima usu- ally are observed before dawn and tend to be system- atically lower than the mid-morning to noontime observations presented here (e.g., Gelda and Effler, 2002b). Further, such diurnal data support the identi- fication of violations of the daily average standard of 5.0 mg/L that cannot be addressed with a single observation within a day. For example, based on hourly measurements, Effler et al. (1996b) reported violations of the daily average standard for 16 days of a 21-day interval in August of 1993; the minimum standard of 4.0 mg/L was violated for only four days during the same period.
The new oxygen sink of zebra mussel respiration has eliminated the assimilative capacity of this por- tion of the river for oxygen demanding waste. Under the conditions that have prevailed since 1993, exist- ing wastewater discharge permits issued by the state regulatory agency before the invasion for effluents entering the river no longer protect this river's oxygen resources. Further, this degradation of oxygen resources has confounded rehabilitation efforts of a downstream culturally eutrophic lake, Onondaga Lake (Figure 1) (Effler, 1996). This lake has been described as perhaps the most polluted in the United States (Hennigan, 1990), mostly because of the recep- tion of a relatively large (20 percent of total inflow) municipal discharge from the metropolitan Syracuse treatment facility (Metro) (Effler et al., 1996a, 2002). Before the loss of the river's assimilative capacity from the zebra mussel invasion (Effler and Siegfried, 1994; Effler et al., 1998; Gelda and Effler, 2002a), diversion of the effluent from an upgraded Metro to the river was the leading rehabilitation alternative for this lake. The feasibly of reaching water quality goals in this lake by continued discharge of Metro to the lake, as specified in the present plan, has been challenged (Effler et al., 2002; Gelda and Effler, 2003; D.K. Rucinski, M.T. Auer, S.W. Effler, and S.M. O’Donnell, unpublished manuscript).
The Role of Cross Lake
Cross Lake’s function within the river system has been critical to the development and maintenance of dense populations of zebra mussels and the attendant water quality impacts in downstream portions of the river (Effler and Siegfried, 1994; Effler et al., 1997; Effler and Siegfried, 1998) (Figures 2 and 6). Specifi- cally, the lake acts as a source of veligers and food, and to improve the quality of food for this bivalve. Anecdotal observations by the investigators and local residents establish that the shoreline of Cross Lake has supported dense populations of the bivalve since the invasion. Thus, the lake has served as a continu- ing source of veligers to support colonization of down- stream portions of the river. This upstream source of veligers is probably critical in sustaining the popula- tions of this river (Horvath et al., 1996; Stoeckel et al., 1997), as substantial hydrologic retention zones are generally absent. The importance of lakes and reservoirs as sources of zebra mussels to downstream lotic systems has been described by Mackie (1995) and Horvath et al. (1996). Well known examples include the support of recruitment in the upper por- tions of the Illinois River by veliger inputs from Lake Michigan (Stoeckel et al., 1997) and populations in the Rhine River from larvae received from Lake Con- stance (Horvath et al., 1996). Mackie (1995) proposed a simple model to predict the length of river (where simple channel assumption is appropriate) over which recruitment can be supported by upstream adult pop- ulations, as the product of mean current velocity and the larvae development interval (20 to 30 days). According to this model, and using a typical summer low flow velocity of approximately 0.1 m/s for the river (unpublished data, U.S. Geological Survey, Itha- ca, New York), Cross Lake can support downstream recruitment beyond the bounds of the study reach [170 to 260 km; i.e., into Lake Ontario (Figure 1)].
Apparently, the increased grazing losses to zebra mussels in Cross Lake since the invasion have either been relatively minor, or have been compensated for by increased phytoplankton growth, as commonly observed characteristics of hypereutrophy (high con- centrations of phytoplankton biomass, poor clarity, and relatively low SRP levels) continue to prevail in the outlet (Figure 3). Undoubtedly, this has contribut- ed to the observed stability of the water quality signa- tures of the invasion (Figure 6). Ultimately, the severity of these impacts (e.g., severe DO depletion) can be attributed to nutrient (particularly phospho- rus) loading received by upstream portions of the river. Given the multitude and diffuse character of these loads, and the extent to which critical loading levels are exceeded (Effler et al., 1989), it may not befeasible to reduce these loads to levels that would sub- stantially decrease the export of phytoplankton biomass and diminish related impacts in downstream portions of the river.
Cross Lake improves the quality of food for down- stream zebra mussels by affecting a decrease in the IO ratio (Figure 5). There are two components to the significantly lower IO ratio in the lake’s outflow com- pared to the river inflow: (1) increases in the concen- tration of organic particles in the outflow from primary production in the lake, and (2) decreases in the concentrations of the denser inorganic particles carried by the river inflow within the lake from depo- sition (Bloesch, 1995; Auer et al., 1996; Effler and Carter, 1987). Each of these components, and there- fore the net effect of the lake, is subject to substantial temporal variation associated with the timing of phy- toplankton blooms and runoff events. Resuspension in the southern end of the lake, driven by short circuited high river inflow rates, may at times act to increase the IO of the lake outflow. Madon et al. (1998b) reported increases in the IO ratio (particularly between 0.3 and 5.0) caused exponential declines in clearance, ingestion, absorption rates, water process- ing potential, and assimilative efficiencies. Madon et al. (1998b) indicated that poor food quality, reflected by elevated values of the IO ratio, contributed to the high mortality of zebra mussels observed in the Illi- nois River following initial dense colonization. Energy losses by this bivalve were observed to exceed energy gained at IO ratios less than 1.71. Seventy-eight per- cent of the IO observations exceeded 1.71 in the river inflow to Cross Lake, compared to 59 percent for the outflow (Figure 5).
There are of course other aspects of food quality for zebra mussels that are not accommodated in the IO ratio, such as the edibility of various phytoplankton (Baker et al., 1998; Vanderploeg et al., 1996). Zebra mussels are capable of efficient sorting of particles, including phytoplankton (Baker et al., 1998). Baker et al. (1998) reported the preferential ingestion of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa and rejection (via diffuse pseudofeces) of diatoms. However, Vander- ploeg et al. (2001) documented selective rejection of “unpalatable” strains of Microcystis and ingestion of smaller, more desirable algae. Filamentous cyanobac- teria and Microcystis have been reported (Effler et al., 1989) to dominate the phytoplankton assemblage of Cross Lake over the mid-July through September interval. This assemblage is expected to be an appro- priate food source for this bivalve unless the various important species occur in large colonies that can cause mechanical inhibition of clearance, or are toxic (Baker et al., 1998).
Stability of Impacts
The stability of the water quality impacts of the invasion on this river is striking (Figure 6) given the known sources of variability in metabolism, in gener- al, and variations in the population of this river specifically. Numerous sources of variability for zebra mussel metabolism probably have contributed to the wide, short term variations observed annually in water quality signatures (Figure 6) and fluxes of water quality constituents (Figure 7) since the inva- sion. These include seasonal and short term changes in active biomass/size distribution of the bivalve, vari- ations in size, composition, and concentrations of potential food particles (Berg et al., 1996; Lei et al., 1996; Baker et al., 1998), concentrations of nonfood particles (e.g., inorganic turbidity) (Aldridge et al., 1987; Alexander et al., 1994; Summers et al., 1996; Madon et al., 1998b), turbulence (Aldridge et al., 1987; Strayer et al., 1996), temperature (Aldridge et al., 1995), reproductive state (Stoeckmann and Gar- ton, 1997), and variations in the quantity of food and oxygen resources (i.e., loads) delivered to the popula- tion (Figure 8). The last of these depends in this case on the river flow and concentrations of constituents in the Cross Lake outflow.
The longer term stability (multiple years) of zebra mussel populations has important implications within the context of duration of water quality impacts. Early analyses of the European experience, following the invasion of North America, offered little insight on expectations for rivers, as the focus was lakes (Ramcharan et al., 1992). The most dense lake popu- lations in Europe were reported to be the least stable (e.g., peak densities for 1 to 2 years, followed by a pop- ulation crash and subsequent oscillations) (Ramcha- ran et al., 1992). The stability of water quality signatures of zebra mussel metabolism since the inva- sion (Figure 6) suggests stability of the population of this invader over the study reach.
However, though detailed benthic survey data are not available for the entire reach for all years since the invasion, the available data indicate substantial year to year differences in at least the details of the spatial distribution of the invader along this portion of the river. The most dense populations in 1993 (33,000 to 61,000 individuals/m2) (Effler and Siegfried, 1994) and through July 1994 (> 100,000 individuals/m2) were observed in the Cut. Most of the zebra mussel biomass was lost from the Cut during a major runoff event in August 1994. At least a portion of this loss was transported downstream in the form of spherical druses (Botts et al., 1996) (10 to 12 cm diameter; Effler et al., 1997). Populations in the Cut have not approached 1993 and early 1994 levels insubsequent years. Population densities of 1,000 to 10,000 individuals/m2 were reported for three other sites, extending over the lower two-thirds of the study reach in 1994 (Effler and Siegfried, 1998). Surveys in 1995, 1997, and 1998 focused on the upper third of the reach (including the Cut), continued to document relatively dense (e.g., approximately 20,000 individu- als/m2) but highly variable populations (unpublished data, Upstate Freshwater Institute). A more spatially comprehensive survey in 1999 (Beak Consultants Inc., 2000) reported an average of approximately 5,000 individuals/m2 for nine sections along the entire study reach, though substantial longitudinal varia- tions were reported. A nearly complete loss of the 1998 year class from the Cut was reported based on the 1999 survey (Beak Consultants Inc., 2000).
The available zebra mussel survey data are note- worthy for several reasons. First, regardless of the temporal and spatial variability in the population, the population densities are high relative to other impact- ed rivers (e.g., Caraco et al., 1997; Madon et al., 1998b). This qualitatively supports a cause and effect relationship between the invasion and the water qual- ity impacts. Second these survey observations estab- lish that substantial year to year changes in the distribution of zebra mussel biomass occur within the study reach. However, these changes do not necessari- ly establish that substantial variations in total zebra mussel biomass have occurred over this reach (e.g., compensating rearrangements in spatial distribution could result in similar levels of resident biomass). Third, such spatially limited benthic survey data have limitations for quantifying the water quality impacts of the zebra mussel invasion (Gelda and Effler, 2002). There are two important sources of uncertainty in an approach that would seek quantification based on the results of a benthos survey: (1) the extent to which collected samples are representative, because of the heterogeneous distribution of substrate (e.g., Chutter, 1972; Resh, 1979), and (2) wide variations in con- stituent fluxes reported from both laboratory experi- ments (Aldridge et al., 1995; Fanslow et al., 1995; Kryger and Riisgård, 1988) and mass balance analy- ses of in situ data from infested sites (Effler et al., 1998; Gelda et al., 2001; Gelda and Effler, 2002a).
Metabolism and Related Issues
Variations in the export of DO and Chl from Cross Lake to downstream portions of the Seneca River have been shown to be important drivers of zebra mussel metabolism, as manifested in losses and gains in related constituents (Figure 8). These variations have two important components, Q and concentra- tions of these constituents. River flow varies naturally
as a function of runoff and in response to managed operations. Concentrations of DO and Chl vary in this system more than in most lakes for at least two rea- sons: (1) the prevailing hypereutrophy, and (2) changes in the extent of short circuiting of the river inflow to the lake's outlet (Effler et al., 1989). Losses and gains in these constituents over the study reach were not significantly correlated with temperature variations over the summertime conditions addressed here.
The estimates of gains and losses of constituents across the study reach based on measurements at the bounds of the reach are imperfect and should be con- sidered first approximations. First, these estimates implicitly assume steady state conditions. This assumption is not always supported in this system, particularly when dynamics of conditions in the lake are considered. The DO concentrations in the lake outflow are expected to be the most problematic of the constituents considered because of the well known, short term (diurnal) variability of this constituent, driven by the daily light cycle (e.g., Gelda and Effler, 2002b). However, longitudinal profiles of these con- stituents have been reported to have a largely pro- gressive character (e.g., Gelda and Effler, 2002a). Further, though modeling analyses have demonstrat- ed the dominant role of zebra mussel metabolism in regulating the cycling of the constituents addressed here over this reach (Canale and Chapra, 2002; Gelda and Effler, 2002a), the extent of this dominance varies.
Concentrations and changes in concentrations driv- en by zebra mussel metabolism are important consid- erations in assessing water quality and status with respect to related standards. However, the net masses of the constituents consumed or mobilized per unit time are much more directly related to metabolic activity. Alternatively, these net changes in mass per unit time have been represented here and elsewhere (Effler et al., 1998; Gelda et al., 2001; Canale and Chapra, 2002; Gelda and Effler, 2002) as areal fluxes and filtering rates. This representation has the bene- fit of mechanistic consistency with the sessile habitat of this bivalve and the description of the metabolic processes of respiration, filtering/grazing, and nutri- ent excretion (mobilization) in mechanistic mass bal- ance models that accommodate zebra mussels (Gelda et al., 2001; Canale and Chapra, 2002; Gelda and Effler, 2002a). The river length considered here is similar to that considered by Canale and Chapra (2002). The ZOD and kf values for the conditions con- sidered here (Figures 8a and 8b) are compared (Table 5) to those reported by Canale and Chapra (2002). The median values are remarkably close for ZOD and kf, but the excretion fluxes reported here are nearly twice as high. Further, the ranges observed here aremuch broader than those of Canale and Chapra (2002). This difference reflects not only the limited numbers of observations (n = 9) but also the much tighter constraints on Q (and therefore export of DO and Chl) imposed in the analysis of Canale and Chapra (2002). The approximate Q range of their nine surveys was 13 to 25 m3/s, compared to 5 to 38 m3/s accommodated here for DO and 5 to 252 m3/s for Chl. The focus of the analysis of Canale and Chapra (2002) on low Qs reflects an emphasis on water quality con- ditions considered critical to waste assimilative capac- ity. However, in the broader context of zebra mussel metabolism, their analysis did not represent the sub- stantial and highly organized variations in these metabolic rates manifested over a wider range of ambient conditions (Figures 8a, 8b, and 8c).
The simplistic flux estimates presented here and by Canale and Chapra (2002) are average values for rather long river reaches. The magnitudes of the flux- es are high, consistent with the water quality signa- tures at Baldwinsville (e.g., Gelda and Effler, 2002a), e.g., exceeding values reported for exchange rates between organically enriched sediments and overlying waters (e.g., Effler et al., 1997, 1998). However, uni- formity in these fluxes should not be assumed across the length of the study reach. In fact, it has been demonstrated that substantial differences in these fluxes prevailed along this reach in 1994 (Gelda and Effler, 2002a). This spatial structure may vary from year to year associated with redistributions of zebra mussel biomass within the reach.
The strong, positive relationships observed between consumption and delivery rates for both DO and Chl (Figures 8a and 8b) have important ecological and related water quality implications for this system and perhaps others. While the most pronounced water quality impacts for DO and other constituents are observed when Q is low, there is some compensation of increased activity as Q (i.e., constituent export) increases (Figures 8a and 8b). The zebra mussel popu- lation over this river reach is apparently resource limited under commonly occurring conditions of DO and Chl export from Cross Lake. For example, the effective consumption rates of the resident population
are reduced during particularly low Q (i.e., export) intervals because of the limited resources delivered to the downstream reach. This is exacerbated in inter- vals of coincidently low constituent concentrations (the other component of export). The metabolic capaci- ty apparently exists, and is exerted, to consume greater quantities when delivered during intervals of increased lake export (Figures 8a and 8b). This sug- gests that the population of this invader is main- tained at levels above which maximum metabolic activity can be sustained. Further, according to the indicated resource limitation, substantial interannual differences in resident biomass could occur without clear coupled manifestations in water quality signa- tures. Thus, substantial interannual variations in zebra mussel biomass may have occurred, despite the stability in water quality impacts reported here for the post-invasion interval (Figure 6). These character- istics further limit the utility of benthic surveys as a quantitative basis to assess potential related water quality impacts, and they reinforce concerns for the representativeness of laboratory experiments for determining metabolic rates (Gelda and Effler, 2002a).
The relationship between the gains in T-NH3 and SRP over the reach (Figure 8d) is generally consistent with zebra mussel excretion as the primary origin of these gains (Arnott and Vanni, 1996; Effler et al., 1977). The best fit T-NH3:SRP ratio (7.1 molar N:P) was within the broad range reported by Arnott and Vanni (1996). The apparent temporal variability in this stoichiometry (e.g., scatter of Figure 8d) is attributed to a number of factors, including: (1) shifts in the size structure of the zebra mussel population (Arnott and Vanni, 1996); (2) seasonality in the extent of N limitation in Cross Lake (Effler et al., 1989); (3) shifts in the stoichiometry of particles, particularly phytoplankton, exported from the lake; and (4) varia- tions in the extent of short circuiting of the river inflow to the lake outlet. Further, the T-NH3:SRP ratio underestimates the N:P ratio of zebra mussel excretion in the study reach to the extent that excret- ed T-NH3 is nitrified, which may also vary temporally.The general coupling of the metabolic processes of respiration, filtration, and excretion is supported by the significant relationships between DO and Chl con- sumption and SRP gains (Figures 8e, 8f, and 8g). Part of the substantial scatter in these relationships is undoubtedly associated with the imperfect character of this water quality information as measures of these features of metabolism. However, it probably also reflects an extent of uncoupling of these processes.
Water clarity (SD) in this river is regulated by a combination of phytoplankton and tripton (Effler et al., 1988, 1996b). This is consistent with the character of the empirical expression developed here (Equation 3) that depends on Chl and Q, e.g., increases in Q cause increases in tripton through resuspension and delivery of upstream inputs through the lake (short circuited flow). Increases in SD over the study reach may reflect reductions in both Chl and tripton (Effler et al., 1996b). Reductions in water column tripton would largely reflect the incorporation of this materi- al into psuedofeces of the invader over the study reach.
CONCLUSIONS
The zebra mussel invasion has converted the Seneca River at Baldwinsville from a low clarity, phy- toplankton rich, nutrient depleted system, with near- ly saturated oxygen concentrations, to a system with increased clarity, low phytoplankton levels, highly enriched in dissolved nutrients, with substantially undersaturated oxygen concentrations. These impacts have persisted largely unchanged for a decade and are the strongest documented for a river in North America. The problems caused by the associated degradation of the river’s oxygen resources are partic- ularly acute. Water quality standards for DO are vio- lated and the elimination of the assimilative capacity of this river is confounding rehabilitation efforts for polluted Onondaga Lake.
Cross Lake promotes the downstream zebra mussel population and related water quality impacts by act- ing as a continuing source of veligers and food (phyto- plankton), and by decreasing the inorganic tripton content of the river. This functioning of the lake, in combination with the abundant solid substrate and limited natural reaeration capacity downstream, con- tributes to this river approaching an upper bound for impact of the zebra mussel invasion on oxygen resources.
The level of metabolic activity of the zebra mussel in the river was found to be resource limited – con- sumption of DO and Chl increased linearly according to the mass of these constituents delivered by Cross
Lake. Wide but organized variations in activity have occurred over the post-invasion period in response to variations in export from the lake. Substantial inter- annual variations in zebra mussel biomass could have occurred despite the stability in water quality impacts reported here for the post-invasion interval, because of the resource limited status of the invader.
