xabstract We investigated differences in the abundance, community composition and taxon richness of
sublittoral macroinvertebrates in boreal lakes containing introduced invasive signal crayfish
(Pacifastacus leniusculus) or native noble crayfish (Astacus astacus). We hypothesised that sublittoral
macroinvertebrate assemblages in lakes containing noble crayfish, which reportedly prefer the
shallow littoral, would differ little from those in lakes without crayfish, in contrast to assemblages in
lakes containing signal crayfish, which reportedly forage at greater depths.
2. In a set of 24 small and medium-sized Finnish lakes, eight lakes contained signal crayfish, eight
had noble crayfish and eight control lakes had no crayfish. At three sites per lake, we sampled
macroinvertebrates quantitatively from soft sediment in the sublittoral.
3. The sublittoral macroinvertebrate assemblage in lakes with noble crayfish and control lakes was
similar. In contrast, lakes with signal crayfish had a lower density of Trichoptera and Ephemeroptera,
as well as a lower density and species richness of Chironomidae, and a lower overall benthic density
and taxon richness.
4. In contrast to some previous reports from other habitats, we infer that introduced signal crayfish
have stronger negative effects than native noble crayfish on sublittoral macroinvertebrates. Hence,
the ecological equivalence or differences of crayfish species cannot be generalised across habitats. 


xintroduction


 The impact of invasive species on native biota and ecosystem
processes is an important ecological issue. Nonnative
freshwater crayfish are well-known examples of
animals which have been widely translocated from their
natural ranges and have become invasive in the recipient
regions (Holdich et al., 2009; Gherardi, 2010;
Reynolds & Souty-Grosset, 2012). Previous studies have
reported direct and indirect impacts of non-native crayfish
on invaded ecosystems (NystrÄom, BrÄonmark &
Graneli, 1999; Usio, 2000; NystrÄom et al., 2001; Wilson
et al., 2004; Ruokonen, Karjalainen & HÄamÄalÄainen, 2014),
but these impacts might be species specific (Haddaway
et al., 2012; Jackson et al., 2014) or habitat specific (Kreps,
Baldridge & Lodge, 2012; Hansen et al., 2013; Ruokonen
et al., 2014). Nevertheless, global meta-analyses have
suggested that non-native crayfish generally have stronger
negative effects on other organisms than do native
crayfish (McCarthy et al., 2006; Twardochleb, Olden &
Larson, 2013).
The signal crayfish, Pacifastacus leniusculus, originally
from the Pacific Northwest of North America, has been
introduced widely in Europe, including Finland where
the signal crayfish potentially threatens native biota and
replaces the native noble crayfish, Astacus astacus (Kirjavainen & Sipponen, 2004). However, based on stable
isotope analyses, Ercoli et al. (2014) showed that signal
and native noble crayfish have similar diets within
Finnish boreal lakes, even though at the overall species
level the signal crayfish has a somewhat broader feeding
niche than the noble crayfish, consistent with the results
of Olsson et al. (2009) from Swedish streams. Moreover,
Ercoli et al. (2015) reported similar impacts of signal and
noble crayfish on the shallow littoral macroinvertebrate
benthos in Finnish boreal lakes, suggesting that these
two crayfish species can be ecologically equivalent in
this kind of habitat. Similar effects of these two species
on invertebrate prey were also reported by Lagrue et al.
(2014) from a French stream.
Crayfish are highly mobile (Gherardi & Barbaresi,
2000) and the signal crayfish in particular is capable of
migrating from the littoral to deeper areas of lakes (Flint,
1977; Ruokonen et al., 2012), where they can affect the
benthos by direct feeding and by modifying physical
habitat and nutrient dynamics (Johnson, Rice & Reid,
2011; Harvey et al., 2014). Given that the effects of crayfish
can be habitat specific and that signal crayfish colonise
deeper water (Tulonen et al., 2008; Erkamo et al.,
2010; Ruokonen et al., 2012) than noble crayfish (which
is more restricted to the shallow littoral; Westman, Savolainen
& Julkunen, 2002), we might expect that effects
on macroinvertebrate assemblages beyond the shallow
littoral will be stronger for signal than for noble crayfish.
Most previous studies have only investigated the effects
of crayfish on littoral communities in lakes (NystrÄom
et al., 1999; Dorn & Wojdak, 2004; Karen et al., 2004;
Gherardi & Acquistapace, 2007; Ruokonen et al., 2014;
Ercoli et al., 2015), whereas impacts of crayfish in deeper
water are largely unknown.
The sublittoral of lakes extends from the middle of the
littoral zone to the limit of the euphotic zone and is
characterised by a species-poor macroinvertebrate benthos,
usually dominated by Oligochaeta, Chironomidae,
amphipod crustaceans and mussels (Kalff, 2002). Knowledge
of the effects of crayfish on the sublittoral benthos
is needed for better understanding of the ecology of
lakes and for management and conservation of their
native biota. Using quantitative data on macroinvertebrates
from the sublittoral of Finnish boreal lakes with
either signal or noble crayfish or no crayfish at all, we
investigated (i) whether the presence of introduced signal
and native noble crayfish is associated with any differences
in population density, species richness and
composition of the sublittoral macroinvertebrate benthos,
and (ii) if so, whether the apparent effects of the
two crayfish species are similar. xmethods The study lakes (Fig. 1) are in south-central Finland (see
Table 1 for locations and environmental characteristics
of the individual lakes) and were chosen on the basis of
the crayfish register of the Finnish Game and Fisheries
Research Institute (FGFRI). According to these data, signal
and noble crayfish do not occur together in lakes,
due to the crayfish plague which is carried by the signal
crayfish and transferred to the more vulnerable noble
crayfish. Hence, we had to study the two crayfish species
in separate lakes. We selected eight lakes containing
signal crayfish, eight lakes containing noble crayfish and
eight lakes without crayfish. The lakes were as similar
as possible with respect to water quality and morphometry
(Table 1). Water quality measures (pH, colour,
dissolved oxygen and total phosphorus concentration at
2ñ5 m depth) and lake morphometry (lake area, shoreline
length) have been collected for each lake from the
HERTTA database (http://wwwp2.ymparisto.fi/scripts/
hearts/welcome.asp) (see Ercoli et al., 2014, 2015),
whereas the slope of the shore of each lake was calculated
as in Ercoli et al. (2014, 2015). All the lakes are in
rural catchments without shoreline urbanisation.
Signal crayfish were introduced into some lakes in this
area in the 1990s, and their populations are nowadays
considered well established (Erkamo et al., 2010). The
history of individual native noble crayfish populations is
not documented in detail, but they have often been
restocked where original populations were reduced and noble crayfish have also been introduced into lakes that
previously lacked crayfish both within and even beyond
their native geographic range in Finland. The lakes with
noble crayfish in our study are all within the native
range and have long-established natural populations
(JÄarvi, 1910). We were not able to carry out crayfish trapping
in the lakes to obtain empirical data on their distribution
and abundance. Therefore, we had to rely on
crayfish data made available by the FGFRI. Although
quantitative data for crayfish were not available from
our sampling years, FGFRI provided data on the numerical
abundance of signal and noble crayfish in terms of
catch per unit effort (CPUE, number of individuals
trap
1 night
1) from previous years (see Table 1). These
data were obtained using cylindrical traps baited with
dead cyprinids and placed along the shore during the
evening and collected the following morning. From
some lakes, only rough estimates were available and for
some lakes only knowledge of ëexploitable populationí,
which indicates the minimum crayfish density exploitable
for commercial purposes, which in Finland is considered
to be CPUE > 1 (Erkamo et al., 2010). Assuming
the CPUE of 1 for exploitable populations and 2 and 3
for the lakes KarisjÄarvi and AuhjÄarvi (see Table 1), the
mean density (SE) of noble and signal crayfish
between the two lake categories was not significantly
different (mean CPUE for signal crayfish 4.4  5.5, and
noble crayfish 2.3  1.2, t-test, P = 0.27). All the crayfish
lakes had an exploitable population in the study years
(see Ercoli et al., 2014, 2015). The FRGI or local lake
owners confirmed that control lakes lacked crayfish,
either because they have lost their native populations or
because crayfish have never managed to colonise them;
nonetheless, based on their environmental conditions,
we assume that they are equally habitable for crayfish. Sublittoral macroinvertebrate were sampled either in
August 2010 or in August 2011, and equal numbers of
lakes were sampled from each lake category in both years
(see Table 1). Five replicate sublittoral samples were taken
from soft sediment (the dominant sublittoral substratum)
at three widely spaced sites (minimum distance from each
other, 500 m) in each lake at 2ñ5 m depth (according to
the location of the sublittoral zone) using an Ekman grab
(area, 0.026 m2). Samples were immediately preserved in
70% ethanol and, in the laboratory, macroinvertebrates
were sorted, identified (mostly to species or genus) and
counted. Animals were then pooled into higher taxa (families
or orders) and weighed (wet mass, after blotting
excess moisture). After weighing, head capsules of Chironomidae
larvae were mounted on microscope slides in
Euparal and identified to genus. No crayfish were
caught by the Ekman grab. A linear mixed effects (LME) model for nested data
(Zuur et al., 2009) was used to explore the effects of signal
and noble crayfish on macroinvertebrate density
(numbers m
2), biomass (mg m
2) and Shannon diversity
index in the lakes. The response variables such as macroinvertebrate
density, biomass and Shannon diversity
index calculated for each site were included as observational
units in the model, while lake category and lake
were fixed and random factors, respectively. A generalised
linear mixed model (GLMM), with Poisson distribution
for count data (Zuur et al., 2009) and the same fixed
and random factors as in LME, was used to test for differences
in taxon richness of total macroinvertebrates and
of Chironomidae (which was the most diverse group)
among lake categories. To control for the effects of environmental
characteristics, we first carried out principal
components analysis (PCA) on the environmental variables
(Table 1), selected PCs with eigenvalues greater
than unity and added these into the LMEs and GLMMs.
In the initial models, only the main effects (lake category,
PC1 and PC2) were included and then their interactions
(lake category x PCs) were added if the model was
improved, as judged by the Akaike information criterion
(AIC). Models were checked for homogeneity and normality
of residuals by exploring residual versus fitted
values plots for any patterns. Densities of the taxonomic
groups (Gastropoda, Bivalvia (Sphaeridae), Oligochaeta,
Isopoda (Asellus aquaticus), Ephemeroptera, Chironomidae,
Ceratopogonidae and Trichoptera) were also separately
modelled as described above.
To compare assemblages among the three lake categories,
we grouped macroinvertebrates into higher taxa,
mainly orders (cf. Ercoli et al., 2015): Gastropoda, Bivalvia
(Sphaeridae), Oligochaeta, Nematoda, Amphipoda,
Isopoda (Asellus aquaticus), Ephemeroptera, Megaloptera
(Sialidae), Heteroptera (Corixidae), Coleoptera, Chironomidae,
Tabanidae, Ceratopogonidae and Trichoptera. We
used non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination,
on transformed [log(mean count+1)] density data
with the BrayñCurtis distance measure, to explore visually
how the macroinvertebrate assemblages differed
among lakes and lake groups. To test whether the environmental
features affected macroinvertebrate assemblages
among lake categories, NMDS axes solutions were correlated with a second matrix containing environmental
variables and tested for their correlation with
the ordination using a permutation test. Lake categories
were also tested for differences using MRPP (multiresponse
permutation procedures). Indicator species
analysis (ISA) was performed to distinguish those taxa
that characterised the community of a particular lake
category.
All statistical analyses were performed in R 2.15.2
(R Core Team and contributors worldwide, 2012). Variables
were square-root-transformed if assumptions of
normality were not met (total macroinvertebrate,
Ephemeroptera and Chironomidae densities). LME model
and GLMM were performed using the lme and glmer
functions, respectively, under the lme4 package (Zuur
et al., 2009), while principal component analysis (PCA)
was performed using the prcomp function under the stats
package (Holland, 2008). We used the vegan package
(Oksanen, 2013) for NMDS with the ordiellipse function
and MRPP, and the indicspecies package for ISA (Caceres,
2013). 


xresults Environmental characteristics were similar among lake
categories (Table 1); only dissolved oxygen differed,
which was due to the very low value recorded in one
signal crayfish lake, Auhjarvi (see Table 1). Therefore,
we tested whether lake categories would have had a different
macroinvertebrate composition and consequently
would have been differently grouped with or without
Lake AuhjÄarvi. Moreover, we also checked whether
macroinvertebrate density was correlated with oxygen.
Results showed that the inclusion of Lake AuhjÄarvi was
not a determinant in the non-metric multidimensional
scaling (NMDS) ordination or in MRPP results and that
there was no correlation between density and oxygen,
demonstrating that oxygen was not a primary influence
for the macroinvertebrate composition in our study
lakes. Principal components 1 and 2 (Table 1), having eigenvalues
greater than 1 (49.18 and 45.46, respectively),
were selected to summarise environmental variability
among lakes and were included in the models. However,
none of the response variables showed any significant
association with these PCs controlling for the effect
of environmental variability (Table 1).
Macroinvertebrate density (t = 2.62, d.f. = 19,
P = 0.01), taxon richness (Z = 5.19, P < 0.001) and the Shannon diversity index (t = 4.27, d.f. = 19, P < 0.001)
were significantly lower in signal crayfish, but not in
noble crayfish, lakes than in control lakes (Table 2;
Fig. 2añc). No significant effects of lake category on
macroinvertebrate total biomass were found (Table 2;
Fig. 2d).
The densities of most taxonomic groups (Fig. 3a) were
similar across lake categories, except for Chironomidae,
Trichoptera and Ephemeroptera, which again showed
lower abundances in lakes with signal crayfish rather
than in noble crayfish or control lakes (Table 2). No taxonomic
group showed any significant difference in biomass
among lake types (Fig. 3b).
There were also significant effects of signal crayfish on
the generic richness of Chironomidae (Table 2; Fig. 4).
Signal crayfish lakes had lower richness than control
lakes or those with noble crayfish (Table 2). Indicator
species analysis revealed differences in the taxonomic
composition of Chironomidae, Trichoptera and Ephemeroptera
among the lake categories (Table 3). Whereas
some taxa were characteristic of noble crayfish and control
lakes, no taxon was characteristic of signal crayfish
lakes.
Based on the decrease in stress, a three-dimensional
solution was optimal for non-metric multidimensional
scaling (NMDS) ordination (final stress = 0.11) of the
lakes on the basis of the macroinvertebrate composition
(Fig. 5). The ordination spaces formed by axis 1 versus 2
(Fig. 5a) and axis 1 versus 3 (Fig. 5b) indicate a rather
similar macroinvertebrate composition in noble crayfish
and control lakes, but a substantial differentiation of
these from signal crayfish lakes. This differentiation in
macroinvertebrate assemblages was also supported by
multi-response permutation procedures (MRPP) analysis
showing that signal crayfish lakes differed significantly
from noble crayfish lakes (A = 0.09, P = 0.02) and from
control lakes (A = 0.17, P = 0.002), whereas there was no
difference between the two latter lake categories
(A = 0.01, P = 0.65). 


xdiscussion
 There were no differences in the sublittoral macroinvertebrate
benthos in lakes with noble crayfish and
lakes with no crayfish, indicating that the native noble
crayfish has no significant effect on macroinvertebrate assemblages in deeper water. In contrast, and consistent
with our hypothesis, the density and taxon richness
was less and community composition was
different in lakes with the invasive signal crayfish.
Tulonen et al. (2008) reported that signal crayfish will
occupy deeper water than noble crayfish in Finnish
lakes, as also documented by SvÄardson, FÄurst &
FjÄalling (1991) from three Swedish lakes. This capacity
of the signal crayfish to forage deeper means it can
potentially exert a wider impact on lake macroinvertebrate
assemblages. Hence, even though we were not
able to carry out the trapping that would have been
required to document conclusively the presence of signal
crayfish or absence of noble crayfish in the sublittoral
of the lakes and support a direct effect of signal
crayfish on sublittoral macroinvertebrates, we believe
the most plausible explanation for the difference we found between sublittoral macroinvertebrates in noble
and signal crayfish lakes is that signal crayfish were
foraging in the sublittoral whereas noble crayfish were
not to any meaningful extent.
Our results are consistent with reports by NystrÄom
et al. (1999), Dunoyer et al. (2013) and Ruokonen et al.
(2014) that the introduced signal crayfish strongly
affects native macroinvertebrates. Furthermore, recent
results from meta-analyses and field research comparing
the impacts of several non-native and native crayfish
species have suggested that, in general, non-native
species have stronger, though variable, impacts on
native communities than native crayfish (McCarthy
et al., 2006; Twardochleb et al., 2013), consistent with
our findings for sublittoral macroinvertebrates. In contrast,
Lagrue et al. (2014) recently reported that invasive
signal crayfish and native noble crayfish had
similar negative effects on macroinvertebrates, indicating
a rather similar ecological role for the two species
in a French river. Most of these previous studies have
been conducted at small experimental scales or in controlled
laboratory experiments, results from which may
not be robustly extrapolated to whole-lake responses,
as Lagrue et al. (2014) also suggested. Thus, our results
at the whole-lake scale provide important additional
insights into the relative impacts of these two crayfish
species.
The results extend our previous findings that the density,
taxon richness and taxonomic composition of littoral
macroinvertebrates did not differ significantly
between signal and noble crayfish lakes (Ercoli et al.,
2015), indicating similar ecological effects of the two species
on the littoral zoobenthos. Moreover, stable isotope
analyses indicated that the two species used similar food
sources in similar proportions (Ercoli et al., 2014). Thus,
in these medium-sized and fairly shallow boreal lakes,
both crayfish species probably forage mainly in the shallow
littoral using similar food resources and having similar
impacts on macroinvertebrate assemblages, although
the reported capacity of the signal crayfish to forage
deeper into the sublittoral apparently gives it a larger
overall food niche width (Ercoli et al., 2014).
The sublittoral densities of Chironomidae, Ephemeroptera
and Trichoptera, and the species richness of chironomids,
were less in lakes with signal crayfish.
Although Hanson, Chambers & Prepas (1990) and
NystrÄom et al. (1999) found that both mobile taxa and
sediment-dwelling infauna with different predator
avoidance strategies were less susceptible to predation
by crayfish than other taxa; in our study, sedimentdwelling
Chironomidae and Ephemeroptera, including
mainly burrowing Ephemera larvae, were the groups
most evidently affected in lakes with signal crayfish.
The sublittoral zone is an important compartment of
lakes where oxygen and food availability particularly
influence the macroinvertebrate community structure
and constrain production (MerilÄainen et al., 2003). However,
our results indicate that sublittoral macroinvertebrate
communities can apparently also be influenced by
predators that are able to forage deeper, like invasive
crayfish, as also suggested by Ruokonen et al. (2012) and
Caires et al. (2013).
In conclusion, the findings of this study, in combination
with our previous results on the littoral macroinvertebrate
assemblages (Ercoli et al., 2015), suggest that the
effects of the introduced signal crayfish and native noble
crayfish on macroinvertebrate communities differ
between habitats. The two species have similar effects
on littoral macroinvertebrates, but the invasive signal
crayfish produces stronger negative effects on sublittoral
macroinvertebrate. Further research is needed at the
whole-ecosystem scale to develop efficient management
and conservation strategies for invasive and native crayfish
and particularly to evaluate whether, in countries
like Finland with important crayfish fisheries, signal
crayfish can be safely stocked as an ëecologically equivalentí
species to replace noble crayfish populations that
have been lost from lakes.