xabstract The introduced North American signal crayfish Pacifastacus leniusculus (Dana) has replaced the native
noble crayfish (Astacus astacus) in many European freshwaters and can be considered a new component of these
ecosystems. The 2 species are apparently similar in many respects, but their ecological equivalence is uncertain and
has been little investigated, especially at the whole-lake scale. We compared the effects of the 2 species on the
abundance, species richness, and composition of littoralmacroinvertebrate assemblages in a set of small- andmediumsized
boreal lakes, which included 8 lakes with noble crayfish, 8 lakes with signal crayfish, and 8 lakes without
crayfish. We collected semiquantitative littoral macroinvertebrate samples with a kick net from 3 replicate sites
in each lake. The abundance of invertebrates did not differ significantly among the 3 lake categories, but lakes with
crayfish had lower species richness than lakes without crayfish. Mollusk taxa, in particular, were fewer in lakes with
crayfish. Assemblage composition also differed between lakes with and without crayfish. However, macroinvertebrate
species richness and composition did not differ between lakes with signal or noble crayfish, indicating that
the 2 crayfish species are ecologically equivalent with respect to their effects on shallow, littoral invertebrate assemblages
of boreal lakes. 


xintroduction Freshwater ecosystems worldwide are among the habitats
particularly affected by introductions of invasive exotic
species, which represent a serious threat to their biodiversity
(Dudgeon et al. 2006, Strayer and Dudgeon 2010,
Jackson and Grey 2012). Freshwater crayfish have been
widely translocated from their native ranges to new habitats
all over the world (Holdich et al. 2009, Gherardi 2010).
Because they are omnivorous and capable of interacting
across multiple trophic levels (Lodge et al. 1994, Geiger
et al. 2005), crayfish can be considered particularly influential
in foodweb structure (Nystrˆm 2002, Stenroth and
Nystrˆm 2003, Reynolds and Souty-Grosset 2012b) and as
ecosystem engineers that exert a strong effect on native
biota (Nystrˆm et al. 1999, Wilson et al. 2004, McCarthy
et al. 2006).
Many investigators have reported that nonnative crayfish
can strongly affect littoral macroinvertebrate assemblages,
especially snails (Nystrˆm and Perez 1998, Nystrˆm
et al. 2001, Correia 2002, Wilson et al. 2004, McCarthy
et al. 2006, Gherardi 2007, Ruokonen et al. 2014), reducing
abundance and species richness directly by predation
(Nystrˆm et al. 2001, Wilson et al. 2004, McCarthy
et al. 2006, Ruokonen et al. 2014) or indirectly via more
complex interactions through habitat alteration (Nystrˆm
et al. 1999), bioturbation, and consumption of detritus (Usio
2000).
Authors of global meta-analyses (McCarthy et al. 2006,
Twardochleb et al. 2013) have found that nonnative crayfish
tend to have stronger negative effects than native crayfish
on benthic invertebrates and especially snails. However,
studies specifically contrasting ecological effects between
invasive and native crayfish are few and do not provide
conclusive support for differences in ecological roles between
them (McCarthy et al. 2006, Twardochleb et al. 2013).
In general, studies of the effects of nonnative crayfish species
have mainly been small-scale experiments or single
crayfish species investigations, reporting effects on specific
taxa or ecosystem processes (Lodge et al. 2000, Geiger
et al. 2005, Crawford et al. 2006, Gherardi and Acquistapace
2007, Ruokonen et al. 2014). Moreover, only small-scale
studies based on experimental manipulations were included
in the meta-analyses by McCarthy et al. (2006) and Twar-dochleb et al. (2013). A more comprehensive understanding
of the effects of invasive crayfish requires complementary
research done at different spatial scales (McCarthy
et al. 2006, Rosenthal et al. 2006, Hansen et al. 2013).
Lodge et al. (1998) found consistent results among a laboratory
experiment, small field-cage experiment, and a lake
survey. Even though their study suggested that small-scale
experiments can provide information relevant to management
of invasive crayfish, results of studies done at different
spatial scales often are not consistent (Schindler 1998).
Hence, in general, direct comparisons of the effects of invasive
and native crayfish species and, in particular, studies
done in natural conditions at the whole-lake scale are
needed. In the absence of comparative studies done at a
realistic scale, whether invasive and native crayfish have
equivalent roles in and effects on lake ecosystems will remain
unclear. However, this information is important for
assessing risk associated with invasive species (Leung et al.
2012) and for detecting the effects of native crayfish on littoral
assemblages in their natural range. It also is essential
to understand the potential ecological effects of native species
when transferred to new ecosystems, e.g., the potential
threat posed to other protected or endangered native
species (Olden et al. 2010).
The signal crayfish, Pacifastacus leniusculus Dana, has
been introduced repeatedly from the Pacific Northwest of
North America to Europe, including Finland, since ~1960.
Introductions often were deliberate attempts to replace
populations of native noble crayfish, Astacus astacus, lost
during the outbreak of crayfish plague (Aphanomyces astacii)
(Sˆderb‰ck 1995, Holdich et al. 2009). In Finland, signal
and noble crayfish often are regarded as being ecologically
equivalent (Kirjavainen and Sipponen 2004), even though
the results of some earlier (e.g., Nystrˆm et al. 1999) and
quite recent (Dunoyer et al. 2014) manipulative studies have
suggested that the invasive signal crayfish can have greater
impacts than native noble crayfish on littoral assemblages
and ecosystem processes.
We investigated the effects of nonnative signal crayfish
and native noble crayfish on benthic macroinvertebrate assemblages
under natural conditions at a replicated wholelake
scale in a set of small- and medium-sized boreal lakes.
Our main aims were to: 1) investigate the effects of crayfish
on littoral macroinvertebrate assemblages, and 2) examine
whether the effects of invasive signal and native
noble crayfish are equivalent in such lakes. We used 8 replicate
lakes in each of 3 categories (with signal crayfish, with
noble crayfish, and without crayfish), so our findings should
be more robust than, and an important supplement to,
those reported from small-scale and short-term experimental
manipulations. 


xmethods We identified potential study lakes on the basis of the
crayfish introduction register maintained by the Finnish
Game and Fisheries Research Institute. We made the final
selection of study lakes on the basis of similar abiotic features
(Tables 1, S1) and the crayfish species present. We
selected 8 lakes with signal crayfish, 8 with noble crayfish,
and 8 lakes without crayfish (controls), from south-central
Finland (Fig. 1). We had originally planned to include lakes
with both crayfish species, but we were unable to find
lakes in which the 2 species coexist. Signal and noble crayfish
lakes fell into 2 more-or-less distinct regional groups
(Fig. 1) that reflected the current distributions of the 2 species
in the area, but control lakes were chosen to cover
the whole study lake area and, thus, countered any possible
geographical differentiation in response variables between
lakes with and without crayfish.
The signal crayfish was introduced into the study lakes
in the 1990s and is now well established. We assumed that noble crayfish populations have occupied their lakes for
much longer (J‰rvi 1910), but the picture is confused because
in Finland the noble crayfish has been extensively
stocked in lakes in its historic range that lacked crayfish
and in lakes well beyond its natural range. Quantitative
data on crayfish abundance were not available for all lakes
and not for the study years, but previously collected catch
per unit effort (CPUE) data suggest that the 2 crayfish species
had similar abundances in our studied lakes (Table S1).
All lakes containing crayfish had a harvestable population
during the study years, and qualitative samples of crayfish
were caught for other purposes (Ercoli et al. 2014). Environmental features and habitat type greatly affect littoralmacroinvertebrate
assemblage composition, and effects
of the crayfish species on the invertebrate assemblages could
be masked by differences in environmental features among
lake categories. Therefore, we selected lakes that were as
similar as possible in their key environmental characteristics.
We obtained water-quality (pH, color, and P concentration
at 1 m depth) and lake morphometry (lake area, shoreline
length) data for each lake from the HERTTA database
(http://wwwp2.ymparisto.fi/scripts/hearts/welcome.asp)
maintained by the Finnish Environment Institute. Values
of water-quality variables were calculated as means of annual
measurements registered during the previous 10 y for
each lake.
We sampled macroinvertebrates from 3 replicate sampling
sites at 0.5 m depth in each lake (see below). For each
replicate, we visually estimated the % cover of each mineral
particle size (modified Wentworthís scale; Allan 1995)
within a 0.25-m2 quadrat. We calculated the mean percentageweighted
particle size per replicate, used those values to
calculate a site mean, and used the site means to calculate
the mean for each lake.
We estimated the shore slope at each of the 3 replicate
sampling sites by measuring the perpendicular distance from
the shoreline at 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 to 5.0 m of water
depth with a laser distance measurer (400LH; Opti-Logic
Corp., Tullahoma, Tennessee). We calculated the mean slope
of each site, expressed as the angle between the bottom
and the water surface, from the 5 distance measures and
used the values from the 3 sites to calculate a mean slope
value for the lake.
Lakes with the same surface area but increasing shore
length will have a larger littoral area, which will influence
habitat characteristics and assemblage composition (Kalff
2003). Thus, macroinvertebrate assemblage structure and
crayfish feeding might be affected by lake shape. We estimated
the degree of lake shoreline irregularity as the shoreline
development factor (Sdf) calculated as:
Sdf º L
2 ffiffiffiffiffiffi Ap
p (Eq. 1)
where L is the shoreline length (km) and A is the area of
the lake (km2) (Wetzel 2001). We collected macroinvertebrate samples in August
2010 or 2011. We sampled at 3 replicate sites chosen at
each lake from open stony shore areas at 0.5 to 1 m depth.
We selected stony shores because they are the preferred
habitat for and, therefore, could be most strongly affected
by the 2 crayfish species (Ruokonen et al. 2014). At each
site we moved along a 1-m stretch of bottom (parallel
to the shoreline) for 30 s while kicking the substrate and
capturing the detached and suspended material by sweeping
with a kick net (Johnson and Goedkoop 2002), after
which samples were immediately preserved in 70% ethanol.
In the laboratory, samples were sorted, identified to the
lowest feasible taxonomic level (mostly to species or genus),
and counted. We tested for differences in each environmental variable
among lake categories with 1-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) to evaluate if the 3 groups of lakes represented
comparable samples from the same parent lake population.
We calculated mean macroinvertebrate abundance for
each lake from the mean number of animals/sample and
taxon richness as the total number of taxa sampled from
each lake. We also calculated the Shannon diversity index
(McCune and Grace 2002) to quantify species diversity
among the 3 lake categories by taking into account both
the richness and the relative abundance of macroinvertebrate
taxa. We then tested abundance and diversity metrics for differences among the 3 lake categories with
1-way ANOVA and Tukeyís Honestly Significant Difference
(HSD) post hoc pairwise comparisons. We also compared
abundance and richness separately for the main
taxonomic groups. The normality assumption was violated
for some groups, so we used nonparametric KruskalñWallis
tests and pairwise Bonferroni-corrected MannñWhitney
U-tests for this analysis.
We used multivariate analyses to compare assemblage
composition among lake categories. We grouped macroinvertebrates
into higher taxa: Gastropoda, Bivalvia (Sphaeriidae),
Oligochaeta, Hirudinea, Isopoda (Asellus aquaticus), Ephemeroptera,
Odonata, Plecoptera, Neuroptera (Sisyridae),Megaloptera
(Sialidae), Heteroptera (Corixidae), Coleoptera,
Chironomidae, Ceratopogonidae, and Trichoptera. We used
this low taxonomic resolution because most lower-level
taxa (species and genera) were rare and, therefore, higher
taxonomic resolution resulted in greater assemblage variation
within and less differentiation among lake categories.
We used nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination
on transformed (log[mean count + 1]) abundance
data and the BrayñCurtis distance measure to visually explore
whether invertebrate assemblages differed systemaically
among lake categories. We used the same data to test
for differences in assemblages among lake categories with
Multi-Response Permutation Procedures (MRPP). Statistical
analyses were performed in R (version 2.15.2; R Project
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). For the NMDS
we used metaMDS and ordiellipse functions, which are
part of the package vegan (Oksanen 2013). 


xresults


 The measured environmental characteristics did not differ
among the 3 lake categories (Table 1), indicating that
our lakes represented 3 different crayfish treatments but
otherwise had equivalent characteristics.
Total invertebrate abundance did not differ significantly
among lake categories (F = 0.341, df = 2, p = 0.71;
Fig. 2A), but total taxon richness did (F = 6.723, df = 2,
p = 0.005; Fig. 2B). Signal (p = 0.03) and noble (p = 0.004)
crayfish lakes had significantly fewer taxa than control lakes,
but taxon richness did not differ between signal and noble
crayfish lakes (p = 0.65) (Fig. 2B). The Shannon diversity
index differed among lake categories (F = 10.18, df = 2,
p = 0.0008; Fig. 2C). Signal (p = 0.005) and noble (p = 0.001)
crayfish lakes had lower Shannon diversity than control
lakes, but Shannon diversity did not differ between signal
and noble crayfish lakes (p = 0.79).
Most macroinvertebrate taxonomic groups showed comparable
abundance and taxon richness among lake categories,
but certain groups showed marked and significant
differences (Table 2). Gastropoda abundance differed among
lake categories (KruskalñWallis ?2 = 7.43, df = 2, p = 0.02;
Fig. 3, Table 2), but post hoc comparisons did not reveal
differences between signal crayfish and control lakes (p =
0.07), noble crayfish and control lakes (p = 0.12), or signal
and noble crayfish lakes (p = 1.00). Gastropoda taxon
richness differed among lake categories (?2 = 8.27, df = 2,
p = 0.01; Fig. 4, Table 2), with significantly fewer snail
taxa in signal crayfish than in control lakes (p = 0.03), but
no difference between noble crayfish and control (p = 0.15),
or between signal and noble crayfish lakes (p = 0.88).
Bivalvia (all were pea clams, Sphaeriidae) and Odonata
abundances differed among lake categories (Table 2), mainly
between noble crayfish and control lakes ( p = 0.008, p =
0.01, respectively; Fig. 3). Odonata taxon richness did not
differ among lake categories (Fig. 4, Table 2), whereas
Bivalvia taxon richness was significantly lower in signal
and noble crayfish lakes than in control lakes (noble vs control lakes: p = 0.01, signal vs control lakes: p = 0.04;
Fig. 4, Table 2). Neither abundance nor taxon richness of
Oligochaeta, Isopoda (Asellus aquaticus), Ephemeroptera,
Coleoptera, Chironomidae, and Trichoptera differed among
lake categories (Figs 3, 4, Table 2).
Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination
suggested a 3-dimensional solution (final stress = 0.15) for
the best representation of the lake categories grouped on the
basis of their macroinvertebrate assemblages (Fig. 5AñC).
Signal and noble crayfish lakes overlapped each other and
were clearly separated from the control lakes in the plots of
axis 1 vs 2 and axis 1 vs 3 (Fig. 5A, B), indicating a similar
macroinvertebrate composition in the 2 crayfish lake categories
and differing composition in the control lakes. NMDS
axes 2 and 3 did not strongly differentiate among lake categories
(Fig. 5C). MRPP showed significant differences in assemblage
composition between signal crayfish and control
lakes (A = 0.06, p = 0.04) and between noble crayfish and
control lakes (A = 0.09, p = 0.009), but not between signal
and noble crayfish lakes (A = 0.02, p = 0.15). A permutation
test did not reveal any significant correlations between environmental
variables and NMDS ordination axes.  xdiscussion
 Many studies have been done on the effects of one or
more nonnative crayfish on freshwater littoral assemblages
at different spatial scales. However, very few investigators
have compared the ecological effects of native and invasive
crayfish species in the same region. We addressed
long-term effects of signal and noble crayfish on macroinvertebrate
assemblages at a whole-lake scale in small- and mediumsized
Finnish boreal lakes. We think our study is the most
comprehensive comparison to date of the effects of nonnative
signal and native noble crayfish in boreal lakes. Overall macroinvertebrate abundance did not appear
to differ between crayfish and control lakes. This result
is consistent with a study by Ruokonen et al. (2014) who
found that macroinvertebrate density was not reduced
by invasive signal crayfish in large boreal lakes. However,
our results differ from those reported by Nilsson et al. (2012)
who found that macroinvertebrate abundance was negatively
affected by invasive rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus) in
10 Wisconsin lakes. This discrepancy might be accounted
for by the generally low abundance of crayfish in boreal
lakes (CPUE typically <<10 individuals; Erkamo et al. 2010,
Ruokonen et al. 2014, Sandstrˆm et al. 2014), including
our study lakes (Table S1), compared to the large catches
of O. rusticus typically reported from North American lakes
(Kreps et al. 2012, Nilsson et al. 2012). Signal crayfish were
introduced into our study lakes almost 20 y ago, and presumably,
noble crayfish have occupied their lakes for a
very long time. Thus, populations probably have reached
an equilibrium in each lake (Sandstrˆm et al. 2014). Hence,
crayfish in these lakes do not have an important effect on
macroinvertebrate abundance, although lakes with unusually
high crayfish densities might be an exception.
However, lakes in both crayfish categories had significantly
lower macroinvertebrate taxon richness relative
to control lakes, and the Shannon index clearly showed
higher diversity in control than in signal or noble crayfish
lakes. Many investigators have reported similar results
for lakes (Nilsson et al. 2012, Ruokonen et al. 2014) and
streams (Stenroth and Nystrˆm 2003, Crawford et al.
2006, Moorhouse et al. 2014). However, taxon richness
and taxonomic composition did not differ between signal
crayfish and noble crayfish lakes, a result suggesting that
the 2 species have an equivalent role as consumers in these
lakes. Signal and noble crayfish exploit the same food resources
(Nystrˆm and Strand 1996, Nystrˆmet al. 1999) and
have similar trophic niches (Olsson et al. 2009, Ercoli et al.
2014). Signal crayfish consumed more food than noble crayfish,
but these results were from short-term experiments
in small artificial settings (Nystrˆm 2005, Dunoyer et al. 2014). Thus, our conclusions with regard to the similar
effects of the 2 species of crayfish on macroinvertebrate
assemblages are broadly in line with previous studies and
provide no clear evidence that the signal crayfish is a more
active predator than the noble crayfish.
Nystrˆm et al. (1999) argued that prey activity would
be an important influence on crayfish consumption. Mollusks
are slow moving and probably are the taxa most
vulnerable to predation by crayfish, which can greatly reduce
mollusk population size and species richness (Lodge
et al. 1994, Dorn and Wojdak 2004, Klose and Cooper
2012, Ruokonen et al. 2014). We found significantly lower
abundance of Sphaeriidae and a tendency for lower abundance
of Gastropoda in crayfish lakes than in control lakes.
Furthermore, Gastropoda species richness differed between
signal crayfish and control lakes but not between
noble crayfish and control lakes, a result that might be
explained by more selective feeding by signal crayfish. A
meta-analysis by Twardochleb et al. (2013) showed consistently
negative effects of crayfish on Gastropoda abundance
and suggested a tendency for effects of nonnative
species to be stronger than that of native species. However,
the abundance and species richness of Sphaeriidae
and Gastropoda did not differ between signal and noble
crayfish lakes, and recent direct experimental comparisons
indicate that effects can be either similar or different
between species independent of species origin (Nystrˆm
et al. 1999, Olden et al. 2009, Haddaway et al. 2012, Dorn
2013, Jackson et al. 2014). Limited data are available on
effects of crayfish on small Bivalvia in general (e.g., they
were not included in the meta-analysis by Twardochleb
et al. 2013), but Klocker and Strayer (2004) found that
the invasive species Orconectes rusticus and the native
crayfish Orconectes limosus both fed readily and to the
same extent on native bivalves (Sphaeriidae) in a laboratory
experiment.
The effects of crayfish on the abundance of macroinvertebrate
groups other than snails tend to be weak and
variable (McCarthy et al. 2006, Twardochleb et al. 2013).
Larger, more mobile invertebrates generally are less susceptible
than smaller, less mobile invertebrates to crayfish
predation (e.g., Hanson et al. 1990), but burrowing taxa
may be concealed and less susceptible to predation by
crayfish. Nystrˆm et al. (1999) suggested that sedimentdwelling,
infaunal taxa can become dominant in the presence
of crayfish. However, the abundance and taxon richness
of most groups, including mobile taxa like Ephemeroptera
and Coleoptera, less mobile taxa like Trichoptera or Isopoda
(Asellus aquaticus), and burrowing taxa like Chironomidae
and Oligochaeta, did not differ among lake categories.
Odonata was the only group apart from Mollusca
that was significantly less abundant in crayfish lakes (particularly
noble crayfish) than in control lakes. However,
crayfish did not affect Odonata taxon richness. Ruokonen
et al. (2014) reported similar findings from larger boreal
lakes, but in general, responses of Odonata to crayfish have
been variable (McCarthy et al. 2006, Twardochleb et al.
2013). Odonata are mostly sit-and-wait or stalking predators,
and their large body size may make them particularly
attractive prey for crayfish.
Recent meta-analyses have suggested that nonnative
consumers generally have greater effects than native consumers
(Paolucci et al. 2013), and that nonnative crayfish
potentially have stronger effects than native crayfish on native
assemblages (McCarthy et al. 2006, Twardochleb et al.
2013). Ercoli et al. (2014) used a stable-isotope approach
to show that signal and noble crayfish in our study lakes
had very similar diets and similar within-lake trophic niche
widths. They did find some evidence that, across the whole
set of lakes, signal crayfish had a somewhat broader trophic
niche than noble crayfish. Similar results were obtained
in a study of Swedish streams (Olsson et al. 2009). In our
study, the similar trophic characteristics of the 2 crayfish
species were manifested as equivalent effects on littoral macroinvertebrate
abundance and assemblage structure among
crayfish lakes. However, different crayfish species can have
different effects on macroinvertebrate abundance (e.g.,
Haddaway et al. 2012, Dunoyer et al. 2014, Jackson et al.
2014), so our results, which pertain to one pair of invasive
and native species, should not be generalized.
We showed that signal and noble crayfish have similar
effects on littoral macroinvertebrate assemblages in
boreal lakes. Nevertheless, we urge caution when considering
the introduction of signal crayfish to lakes like those
in our study because the 2 species can differ in their effects
on other ecosystem components, e.g., leaf-litter decomposition
(Dunoyer et al. 2014, Jackson et al. 2014),
macrophytes (Hansen et al. 2013), fine sediment dynamics
(Harvey et al. 2014), or macroinvertebrates in other habitats
than stony littoral zones. Influence of crayfish on invertebrate
prey generally is habitat-specific (e.g., Kreps
et al. 2012, Hansen et al. 2013, Ruokonen et al. 2014). For
instance, Ruokonen et al. (2012) suggested that signal crayfish
can exploit prey and have impacts at greater depths
than noble crayfish, although this wider foraging range
might not be relevant for our smaller, shallower lakes
(Table S1).
Our results also show that equal caution should be exercised
when considering the domestic introductions of
native noble crayfish into lakes currently without crayfish,
either with the purpose of creating ìArk sitesî (Reynolds
and Souty-Grosset 2012a, Rosewarne et al. 2013)
for this endangered native crayfish species or for fisheries
purposes. Noble crayfish had effects on macroinvertebrate
assemblages that were similar to the effects of signal crayfish.
Thus, the native crayfish can be considered an introduced
ìnative invaderî (Simberloff et al. 2012) in lakes that
previously lacked this omnivorous species even if those lakes lie within the natural range of the species, and particularly
if they lie beyond that natural range.