xabstract

Benthic metabolism, nutrient fluxes, and denitrification were measured in Caulerpa taxifolia communities that had recently invaded (between 2003 and 2008) bare sediments following the loss of Zostera capricorni (prior to 2003), and in adjacent Z. capricorni communities and bare sediments, to determine the likely changes in ecosystem function following C. taxifolia colonization. Areas colonized by C. taxifolia had higher gross primary production (GPP), net primary production (NPP), and dark benthic N2 effluxes than adjacent bare sediments, but lower dark benthic NH z4 effluxes. C. taxifolia invasion of bare sediments had a beneficial role in removing excess nitrogen from the system through enhanced denitrification. In contrast, areas occupied by C. taxifolia had similar GPP and NPP relative to Z. capricorni beds and similar benthic N2 and NH z4 effluxes. Thus, C. taxifolia appears to play a comparable role to Z. capricorni in terms of some ecosystem functions, although the degree of similarity is likely to be affected by the relative densities of the two macrophytes. However, replacement of Z. capricorni communities by C. taxifolia appears to significantly alter the quantity and quality (higher ratio) of benthic dissolved organic carbon and dissolved organic nitrogen fluxes.

xintroduction
Caulerpa taxifolia (Vahl) C. Agardh is one of the world’s top 100 worst invasive species (Lowe et al. 2000). It has invaded large areas of the Mediterranean (Chisholm and Jaubert 1997), two lagoons in California (Williams and Grosholz 2002), and 14 estuaries in southeastern Australia (Gribben et al. 2009). In the Mediterranean and in Australia, C. taxifolia invades seagrass meadows and bare sediments, which may or may not have previously been colonized by seagrasses (Chisholm et al. 1997; Ceccherelli and Cinelli 1998; Glasby and Creese 2007). Although C. taxifolia is native to subtropical Moreton Bay (eastern Australia) (Phillips and Price 2002), its range is expanding into large areas that were previously colonized by seagrass (Burfeind and Udy 2009). However, rather than directly displacing seagrass, there appears to be a successional trend of seagrass loss (controlled by other factors) followed by C. taxifolia colonization of the bare sediment (Burfeind and Udy 2009).
A number of studies have identified changes in ecological communities such as seagrass (DeVille and Verlaque 1995; Ceccherelli and Sechi 2002), fish (York et al. 2006), bivalves (Wright et al. 2007), and soft-sediment macroinvertebrates (McKinnon et al. 2009) following C. taxifolia invasion. Water column and sediment properties and physical processes are also modified by C. taxifolia colonization. Particle and phytoplankton trapping, carbon sedimentation rates, and sediment organic matter concen- trations are higher in C. taxifolia beds than in adjacent bare sediments but similar to adjacent seagrass beds (Posidonia spp.) (Gribben et al. 2009; Holmer et al. 2009; Hendriks et al. 2010). Water column dissolved oxygen concentrations are lower, and sediment H2S and acid volatile sulfide (AVS)concentrations are higher in C. taxifolia beds than in adjacent bare sediments (Gribben et al. 2009; Holmer et al. 2009).
Despite a number of studies on ecological communities and sediment properties, there has been little effort to investigate how C. taxifolia colonization modifies sediment biogeochemical processes (ecosystem function). One of the few biogeochemical process studies that has been done showed that in dead seagrass beds C. taxifolia stimulates N2 fixation via release of photosynthetic products from its rhizosphere (Chisholm and Moulin 2003). However, the high organic matter, high sulfide, and low oxygen concentrations in C. taxifolia beds suggest that other biogeochemical processes will also be modified. Low oxygen concentrations would be expected to result in lower denitrification efficiencies in C. taxifolia sediments, with more nitrogen recycled to the water column as ammonium and less nitrogen nitrified and then lost to the atmosphere via denitrification (Eyre and Ferguson 2009). Consistent with low denitrification efficiency, sediment slurries have shown low nitrifying activity in C. taxifolia beds (Chisholm et al. 1997). A higher phosphorus efflux would also be expected from C. taxifolia beds due to reducing conditions and the associated reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+, and subsequent release of bound phosphorus. This is reflected in sediment slurries that have shown high phosphate concentrations in C. taxifolia sediments (Chisholm et al. 1997). Uptake of organic carbon and nitrogen (Chisholm et al. 1996), and the release of photosynthetic products (Chisholm and Moulin 2003) by the rhizoids of C. taxifolia suggest that the cycling of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and nitrogen (DON) will also be modified in colonized areas. There has only been one in situ measurement of the primary productivity of C. taxifolia, with fairly high ratesreported in summer at 10-m water depth (30 mmol C m22 d21) (Chisholm and Jaubert 1997), suggesting that where C. taxifolia invades large areas of bare sediment or replaces seagrass there will also be significant changes to the system primary production.
With C. taxifolia colonizing large areas of bare sediment, and areas previously covered with seagrass in the Mediter- ranean and Australia, it is important to understand how these invasions will modify benthic biogeochemical pro- cesses to be able to predict the likely effect on coastal ecosystem functioning. A number of aspects of this work are novel. These were the first measurements of NHz4 , NO{3 , N2, DON, and DOC fluxes in a C. taxifolia community and only the second measurements of in situ primary production. In addition, it is the only study to compare biogeochemical processes in C. taxifolia beds to a similarly sized (structurally similar) native seagrass (Zos- tera capricorni). All others have compared C. taxifolia to the much larger Posidonia oceanica. It is also one of the few to compare C. taxifolia to bare sediments, thereby providing important information about potential changes to sediments following invasion of previously non-vegetat- ed sediments, which is common in Australia.
The hypotheses of this study were that where C. taxifolia has invaded large areas of bare sediment, (1) primary production will be significantly higher in the C. taxifolia community, (2) benthic respiration and sediment anoxia will be higher with associated lower denitrification efficien- cies and a higher phosphorus efflux, and (3) the cycling of DOC and DON will be different from that in bare sediment. To test these hypotheses, this study measured oxygen and carbon dioxide primary productivity and respiration, alkalinity and DOC fluxes, denitrification, and dissolved inorganic and organic fluxes of N and P in C. taxifolia communities that had recently invaded bare
sediments (between 2003 and 2008) following the loss of Z. capricorni (prior to 2003). The same processes were also measured in adjacent Z. capricorni communities and bare sediments to determine the likely changes in ecosystem function following loss of seagrass and subsequent C. taxifolia colonization. Additional hypotheses were that where seagrass was replaced by C. taxifolia (1) primary production would be similar, (2) benthic respiration and sediment anoxia would be higher with associated lower denitrification efficiencies and a higher phosphorus efflux, and (3) the cycling of DOC and DON will be different from that in the seagrass.
We show that there are a number of significant changes in biogeochemical processes when C. taxifolia invades bare sediment and Z. capricorni beds. While some of the results were expected (e.g., higher productivity in the C. taxifolia community than in bare sediment habitat), some of the findings were surprising, such as enhancement of N2 fluxes and, as such, we expect that this work will generate further interest with many more studies of biogeochemical processes in C. taxifolia communities.

xmethods
Study area—The 0.01-km2 study area is in the northwest corner of the larger southern Moreton Bay study area described in detail in Eyre et al. (2011a,b). Southern Moreton Bay, on the east coast of Australia (Fig. 1), is a complex mosaic of islands, shoals, and channels protected from the ocean by a barrier island system (South Stradbroke Island). The open water (the Broadwater) is well flushed with oceanic water through Jumpinpin in the northern section, and through the Gold Coast Seaway in the southern section. Tidal channels are up to 9 m deep, but the Broadwater is generally shallow, averaging just 1.74 mdeep at mid-tide. The Pimpama, Coomera, and Logan Rivers all discharge into southern Moreton Bay. The system is oligotrophic with dry-season algal biomass (chlorophyll a) concentrations typically , 2 mg L21 and dissolved inorganic nitrogen concentrations typically , 1.0 mmol L21 (Eyre et al. 2011b). Vertical light extinction coefficients range from 0.68 to 1.2 (average , 0.93), resulting in , 20% of the incident radiation reaching the seafloor (Eyre et al. 2011a). The region receives an average annual rainfall of 1094 mm (Gold Coast Seaway) with much of it falling in late summer.
The study area was mapped in detail in 2003, as part of a larger mapping exercise, using 1 : 10,000 color aerial photography that was ground-truthed with snorkeling and differential Global Positioning System (GPS) (Eyre et al. 2011a). Three major benthic habitats were found within the study area: (1) Z. capricorni beds with a summer biomass of 75 to 99 g m22, (2) bare organic muds that represented degraded Z. capricorni beds, and (3) sub-tidal shoals of fine sands and muds with a surface layer of benthic microalgae (SKM 2006; Eyre et al. 2011a). The study area was remapped in January 2008 using snorkeling and differential GPS. The Z. capricorni beds and sub-tidal shoals remained unchanged, but the bare organic muds had been invaded by C. taxifolia (typical biomass in Moreton Bay of 85 g m22; D. Burfeind pers. comm.) since the benthic habitat mapping in 2003. Similar invasion of C. taxifolia into areas that were previously colonized by seagrass has been observed throughout Moreton Bay (Burfeind and Udy 2009).
Sample collection—Sampling occurred in January (mid- summer) 2008. Three sites separated by , 50 m that had mixed beds of C. taxifolia, Z. capricorni, and bare sediments were chosen within the study area. At each of the three sites, triplicate cores (, 200 mm long) including overlying water (, 2.3 liters) were taken for benthic process measurements using 500-mm-long, 90-mm-inner-diameter clear acrylic pipes in each of the three benthic habitat types (C. taxifolia, Z. capricorni, bare sediment; 27 cores in total). Cores were examined to ensure that the sediment surface and macrophytes were intact. In addition, at one site (site 1) one 100-mm-long sediment core (90-mm inner diameter) was also collected from each of the three benthic habitat types for solid-phase sediment analysis.
Benthic flux incubations—Details of the core incubations are given in Eyre and Ferguson (2005). Briefly, the cores for benthic flux measurements were transported to Southern Cross University (within 3 h) and placed in approximately 150 liters of aerated site water at in situ temperature (28 6 1uC). The in situ diurnal light–dark cycle was maintained throughout the incubation. A 24-h equilibration period was observed to minimize any artifacts associated with distur- bance of oxygen and nutrient concentration profiles. Stirring was maintained at a speed just below the sediment resuspension threshold via rotating magnets. Light was delivered by four high-pressure 400-W sodium bulbs (Philips Son T Agro) at in situ (sediment surface) mean summer daily irradiance levels (400 mE m22 s21). After the equilibration
period, cores were capped with gas-tight Plexiglas caps and incubated over a 10 : 14 h dark : light cycle.
Dissolved oxygen concentrations (6 0.01 mg L21) and pH (6 0.00 pH units) were measured electrochemically, and alkalinity, nutrient, DOC, and N2 : Ar samples were collected at 0, 6, and 10 h during the dark cycle and at 0, 6, and 14 h during the light cycle. Dissolved oxygen typically only decreased about 20% during dark incubation. Nutrient and alkalinity samples were withdrawn with a plastic syringe and 0.45-mm filtered water was transferred to 10-mL acid-rinsed and sample-rinsed polyethylene vials. DOC samples were withdrawn with a glass syringe and GF/F (precombusted) filtered water was transferred to 40-mL precombusted glass vials. As a sample was with- drawn, an equal amount was replaced from a gravity-fed reservoir of estuary water. To minimize the introduction of bubbles, N2:Ar samples were collected in triplicate by allowing water to flow, driven by the reservoir head, directly into 7-mL gas-tight glass vials with glass stoppers filled to overflowing. The replacement water was with- drawn from a sealed collapsible reservoir bag, also equilibrated at in situ light and temperature conditions, to maintain constant Ar concentrations (Eyre et al. 2002). One core (blank) with only water was pre-incubated and incubated and sampled as above.
All nutrient samples were immediately frozen at –20uC. N2 : Ar samples were poisoned with 20 mL of 5% HgCl2 and stored submerged just below ambient temperature. Alkalinity samples were kept cold at 4uC. DOC samples were killed with 200 mL 50 : 50 w : v ZnCl2 and refrigerated. Details of the alkalinity, TCO2, nutrient, and N2 : Ar analytical methods are given in Eyre and Ferguson (2005). DOC samples were analyzed with a 1030W total organic carbon analyzer (OI Analytical) by high-temperature wet oxidation (200 g L21 sodium persulfate). A five-point standard calibration was used with potassium hydrogen phthalate (KPH). Check standards were included every 10 samples to correct for instrument drift (0.5 mmol C L 21 KPH). Detection limits were 0.2 mmol L21 and the average percent Coefficient of Variation (CV) of duplicate measurements was , 2%.
Fluxes across the sediment–water interface were calcu- lated by linear regression of the concentration data, corrected for the addition of replacement water and changes in the blank, as a function of incubation time, core water volume, and surface area. Dark flux rates were calculated using concentration data from the first 10 h of the incubation and light flux rates were calculated using concentration data from the second 14 h of the incubation. Net flux rates were calculated over the 24-h light and dark period. Benthic production was calculated as:
Gross benthic carbon fixation (CO2-GPP) (uptake) ~Light TCO2 flux{Dark TCO2 flux
Net benthic carbon fixation (CO2-NPP)~Light TCO2 flux
Gross benthic oxygen production (O2-GPP) (efflux) ~Light O2 flux{Dark O2 fluxNet benthic oxygen production (O2-NPP)~Light O2 flux
Benthic TCO2-productivity(p)=respiration(r) ~gross TCO2 fixation|daylight hours=
dark TCO2 flux|24 h
Benthic O2-p=r~gross O2 productivity|daylight hours=
dark O2 flux|24 h
Solid phase—Sediment organic carbon (OC), AVS, and chromium reducible sulfides (CRS) were measured for 2- cm depth intervals (0 to 10 cm) on one core from each habitat (site 1). Samples were frozen (220uC) and analyzed within 1 month. OC was analyzed on a Thermo Flash EA 1112 by high-temperature combustion following removal of inorganic carbon using HCl. AVS and CRS were determined using a two-step distillation (Fossing and Jorgensen 1989).
Statistical analysis—Two-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were run in SPSS (SPSS inc.; version 17.0) to test for effects of the factors site (three levels) and habitat (C. taxifolia, Z. capricorni, bare sediment) on dark, light, and net benthic fluxes (alkalinity, NHz4 , NO{3 , DOC, DON, N2, dissolved inorganic phosphorus [DIP], and dissolved organic phosphorus [DOP]). Two-way ANOVAs were also used to test for effects of site and habitat on respiration (R), net productivity (NPP), gross productivity (GPP), and GPP/R (p/r) based on CO2 and O2 fluxes. A significance level (alpha) of 0.05 was specified. In some cases, Levene’s test showed that variances in compared groups were heterogeneous. The presence of negative values in the data set prevented log transformation to improve homogeneity of variances. However, provided that sample sizes are similar, as was the case for most of the tests done, ANOVAs are robust to violations of the assumption of homogeneous variances (Zar 1999). The chance of a Type I error (falsely identifying a significant difference) was further reduced by defining the significance level as 0.01 when Levene’s test was violated. One-way ANOVAs were used to further investigate the component parts where the effects of factors interacted (e.g., where site and habitat interacted, the effect of habitat on fluxes was investigated separately for each site using a one-way ANOVA). Where significant differences were found using ANOVAs, post hoc Tukey tests were used to determine which sites or habitats had similar or different fluxes. One-way ANOVAs were also used to test for difference in depth-averaged sediment OC content and AVS and CRS concentrations among habitats. Tests comparing OC content excluded samples from the 8–10-cm layer due to the absence of this data for bare sediments. Significant differences were investigated using post hoc Tukey tests. In interpreting results of all statistical tests, we focused specifically on differences among habitats, including where this varied among sites (site 3 habitat interaction), as this was the primary interest of our study.

xresults
Solid phase—There was no significant difference in the depth-averaged OC concentrations of the C. taxifolia (0.71% 6 0.09%; mean 6 SE), Z. capricorni (0.53% 6 0.07%), and bare sediments (0.57% 6 0.03%) (Fig. 2a).
Alkalinity, DOC, and phosphorus fluxes—There was no significant difference in dark, light, and net fluxes of alkalinity among the three habitats. There was an efflux of DOC in the light from all habitats at all sites and an uptake of DOC during the dark except at sites 1 and 3 in the C. taxifolia habitat (Fig. 3). Dark fluxes of DOC in C. taxifolia were significantly different to uptakes of DOC in the Z. capricorni habitat (Table 1; F2,12 5 5.964, p 5 0.01). Dark DOC fluxes in the bare sediments were intermediate, and not significantly different to fluxes from either the C. taxifolia or Z. capricorni habitat. Effluxes of DOC in the light were significantly greater from C. taxifolia than from Z. capricorni or bare sediments, for which effluxes were similar (Table 1; F2,11 5 6.158, p 5 0.01). There was no significant effect of habitat on net fluxes of DOC from Z. capricorni (131.4 6 152.7 mmol m22 h21), C. taxifolia (763.2 6 753.1 mmol m22 h21), and bare sediments (30.7 6 201.1 mmol m22 h21).
There was efflux of DIP in the dark, compared to uptake of DIP in the light. However, dark, light, and net fluxes of DIP did not vary significantly among habitats (Table 1).DOP fluxes in the light were generally effluxes (with the exception of bare sediments in site 3) that did not vary significantly among habitats (Table 1; Fig. 3). In the dark, however, there was uptake of DOP in Z. capricorni beds that was significantly different from effluxes of DOP in bare and C. taxifolia habitats (Table 1; F2,17 5 30.256, p , 0.01), which were similar. There was no significant difference in net DOP fluxes among habitats.
Benthic respiration and primary production—Respiration (R) rates based on both O2 and CO2 varied significantly among habitats (Table 1; O2: F2,24 5 47.090, p , 0.01; CO2: F2,23 5 11.550, p , 0.01) (Fig. 4). In each case, there was significantly less R (less O2 uptake and CO2 efflux) in bare sediments than in either C. taxifolia or Z. capricorni. Although there was significantly more O2-R in Z. capricorni than in C. taxifolia (fluxes were more negative), the CO2-R of these two habitats was not significantly different. Net primary production (NPP) based on O2 and CO2 fluxes varied significantly among habitats (Table 1; O2: F2,24 5 35.507, p , 0.01; CO2: F2,21 5 11.555, p , 0.01) (Fig. 4). O2-NPP was similar in C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni, but was significantly higher in both these habitats than in bare sediments. CO2-NPP in bare sediments was significantly lower than in Z. capricorni (where CO2-NPP was highest). However, CO2-NPP in C. taxifolia was intermediate and not significantly different from that in either Z. capricorni or bare sediments. Gross primary production (GPP) from O2 and CO2 fluxes differed significantly among habitats (Table 1; O2: F2,18 5 43.702, p , 0.01; CO2: F2,15 5 13.155, p , 0.01) (Fig. 4). O2-GPP in bare sediments was significantly lower than in C. taxifolia habitats, and O2-GPP in C. taxifolia was significantly lower than in Z. capricorni habitats. In comparison, CO2-GPP was similar in C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni habitats, but bare sediments were significantly less productive (fluxes were less negative). GPP was strongly correlated with R (O2 based: r2 5 0.89, p , 0.001, n 5 27; gCO2 based: r2 5 0.73, p , 0.001, n 5 27).
CO2-p/r was similar among habitats and sites, and varied from an average of 0.98 6 0.07 for C. taxifolia to 1.24 6 0.15 for Z. capricorni (Fig. 4). There was a similar range for O2-p/r, but O2-p/r varied significantly among habitats (Table 1; F2,18 5 27.631, p , 0.01). Values of O2-p/r were significantly smaller in bare sediments (0.88 6 0.07) than in either C. taxifolia (1.32 6 0.09) or Z. capricorni habitats (1.29 6 0.06), for which O2-p/r was similar.Benthicnitrogenfluxes(NH4 ,NO3 ,DIN,DON,N2)— There was a dark efflux of NH z4 from all habitats at all sites, and a light uptake of NH z4 in all habitats at all sites, with the exception of bare sediments at site 3, where an efflux was measured (Fig. 5). Dark NH z4 fluxes were significantly greater in the bare sediments compared to the Z. capricorni and C. taxifolia habitats (Table 1; F2,16 5 5.604, p 5 0.01). However, there was no significant difference among habitats in light and net fluxes of NH z4 .Fluxes of NO {3 in the dark were similar for C. taxifolia and bare sediments (effluxes in both habitats), but significantly lower for Z. capricorni (uptake; Table 1;F2,14 5 28.449, p , 0.01) (Fig. 5). For fluxes of NO {3 in the light, there was a significant interaction between habitat and site (Table 1; F4,15 5 5.645, p , 0.01). At sites 2 and 3 there was no significant difference in NO {3 uptake among
habitats, but at site 1, there was significantly greater uptake of NO{3 in the C. taxifolia sediments compared to Z. capricorni and bare sediments, for which NO {3 uptake was similar (Table 1; F2,5 5 16.858, p , 0.01) (Fig. 5). Therewas a similar pattern for net fluxes of NO {3 (Table 1; F4,14 5 5.228, p , 0.01), with fluxes similar across habitats at sites 2 and 3, but significantly higher net uptake in the C. taxifolia habitat (fluxes were more negative) than in the Z. capricorni habitat and bare sediments at site 1, for which
fluxes were similar (Table 1; F2,5 5 12.85, p 5 0.01) (Fig. 5).
There was no significant difference in dark fluxes of DON among habitats, all of which had efflux of DON (Fig. 5). Light fluxes of DON were significantly greater in Z. capricorni(effluxes) than in either bare sediments or C. taxifolia habitat (Table 1; F2,16 5 11.113, p , 0.01), for which there was similar uptake of DON. Similarly, net fluxes of DON were significantly greater in Z. capricorni (149.1 6 139.9 mmol m22 h21) than in
bare sediments (216.8 6 32.7 mmol m22 h21) or C. taxifolia habitat (14.5 6 25.21 mmol m22 h21), for which net DON fluxes were similar (uptake or small effluxes) (Table 1; F2,15 5 8.647, p , 0.01) (Fig. 5).There was an efflux of N2 from all habitats in both the light and dark incubations. N2 fluxes in the dark were significantly lower from bare sediments than from C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni habitats, for which N2 fluxes were similar (Table 1; F2,16 5 5.407, p 5 0.01) (Fig. 5).
Due to bubble formation, light N2 fluxes (and net fluxes) were not able to be determined for all sites. One- way ANOVAs were therefore used to test only for an effect of habitat on light and net N2 fluxes. N2 fluxes in the light were significantly higher in Z. capricorni than in either C. taxifolia or bare sediments, for which light N2 fluxes were similar (F2,6 5 22.203, p , 0.01). There was, however, no significant difference in net N2 flux among habitats.

xdiscussion
Primary production and respiration—This study demon- strates that bare sediments that have been invaded by C. taxifolia have higher rates of gross (GPP) and net (NPP) benthic primary production than adjacent bare sediments. Similar higher rates of benthic production (and associated respiration) in vegetated compared to non-vegetated sediments have previously been found in southern Moreton Bay (particularly in summer) (Eyre et al. 2011a) and elsewhere (Barron et al. 2006). C. taxifolia often invades areas of bare sediment (Glasby and Creese 2007), so an invasion will most likely result in higher rates of benthic GPP and NPP. However, compared to Z. capricorni seagrass communities that may previously have inhabited the bare sediment, there is a small overall decrease in GPP. Because respiration (R) is strongly correlated with GPP, when C. taxifolia invades an area of bare sediment in southern Moreton Bay the effect will likely be similar to benthic production with a large increase in R, but compared to the Z. capricorni that once inhabited the bare sediment, there may be a small overall decrease in R (depending on the density of the vegetation).
Although this study was done only in summer, this is when most of the benthic primary production and respiration occurs (Eyre et al. 2011a), suggesting that even if there was a significant difference in production and respiration between the three communities in winter (C. taxifolia is ephemeral in some areas), it would not greatly change the conclusions from the summer study. As such, C. taxifolia would most likely replace much of the GPP and R at the ecosystem scale in southern Moreton Bay that is lost when seagrass declines. Similarly, the O2- and CO2-p/r is not significantly different between C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni, suggesting that the overall system metabolism would also be similar following replacement of a Z. capricorni seagrass community with a C. taxifolia community. However, the biomass of the Z. capricorni and C. taxifolia communities would need to be considered when extrapolating the findings of this study to other areas. For example, in this study the biomass of the two communities was similar and this may be reflected in the similarities in GPP, NPP, and R. Different biomasses, however, would most likely result in different GPP and NPP rates.
Despite similarities in the overall rates of GPP and NPP in southern Moreton Bay, the within-community sources of production may differ between the Z. capricorni and C. taxifolia communities captured in the core incubations. A recent study in a Z. capricorni community about 1 km from the study site roughly estimated that benthic microalgae (BMA) contributed 27%, epiphytes 56%, and seagrass 17% of the GPP (Eyre et al. 2011a). Unfortunately, we did not measure the biomass or productivity of only the BMA or epiphyte community within the C. taxifolia community in this study. Little work has been done on the importance of BMA and epiphytes in C. taxifolia communities. Higher numbers of epiphytic algae have been found on C. taxifolia compared to Z. capricorni in Botany Bay, Australia (Prado and Thibaut 2008), while others have suggested that C. taxifolia’s chemical defenses reduce epiphyte colonization (Guerriero et al. 1992, 1993). To our knowledge only one study has separately measured the BMA productivity in a C. taxifolia community and it was found to have contributed , 1% of the NPP (Chisholm and Jaubert 1997). However, we would expect the BMA contribution to be much higher than 1% in southern Moreton Bay. The density of the C. taxifolia canopy was similar to Z. capricorni, which would allow similar amounts of light to the sediment surface, presumably resulting in similar amounts of BMA production (i.e., 27%). The BMA GPP in the bare sediments was 24% of the C. taxifolia GPP, suggesting a contribution between 1% and 24%. However, in areas where C. taxifolia forms dense beds that smother the sediment surface there would be little BMA production, and it is unknown if C. taxifolia’s chemical defenses would reduce BMA colonization.
The sources of primary production in C. taxifolia communities are clearly an area for further research. Similarly, with the potential for C. taxifolia to contribute much of the primary production in an invaded ecosystem, the role of these different sources of production in C. taxifolia communities (C. taxifolia foliage, BMA, epi- phytes) in supporting both microbial and macrofaunal food chains is also an area for further study (see Holmer et al. 2004, Davis et al. 2005, Casu et al. 2009, Oakes et al. in press for examples of the use of Caulerpa spp. as food sources for bacteria and macrofauna).
Despite higher rates of O2-NPP in the C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni communities compared to the bare sediment, the higher rates of production were not reflected in the OC content in the sediment, suggesting that the NPP is exported off-site or to the bare sediments. The OC content (0.71%) of sediments in the southern Moreton Bay C. taxifolia community were higher than a C. taxifolia community at Mallorca in the Mediterranean (0.3%) (Holmer et al. 2009). Consistent with the higher OC concentrations in southern Moreton Bay were the total sulfide concentrations (AVC + CRS), which were about twice (0.2%) the concentration of sulfide in the sediments of the C. taxifolia community at Mallorca, and the higher proportion of AVS (15%) in the total sulfide pool (, 1% at Mallorca; Holmer et al. 2009). The AVS concentrations in southern Moreton Bay (0.03%) were also about twice that measured in the sediments of a C. taxifolia community inLake Conjola, Australia (0.016%), but the CRS concen- trations were lower (0.17% compared to 0.25%; Gribben et al. 2009).
Nitrogen cycling—To our knowledge, this is the first study to measure benthic fluxes of NH z4 , NO {3 , and N2 in a C. taxifolia community. These measurements showed that the cycling of inorganic nitrogen was closely linked to benthic metabolism. This is best illustrated by the strong positive relationship between denitrification efficiency (dark N2 2 N/[dark DIN + dark N2 2 N] 3 100%) (Eyre and Ferguson 2009) and O2-p/r (Fig. 6a) across the three benthic habitats. This relationship, in turn, is driven by the combination of a strong negative control of O2-p/r on dark DIN effluxes (Fig. 6b), with less DIN released as the community becomes more net autotrophic, and a weak positive control of O2-p/r on dark N2 effluxes (Fig. 6c) due to covariation between O2-p/r and O2-R (r2 5 0.32, p , 0.05, n 5 27). Similar relationships hold for net DIN and N2 fluxes. Dark N2 effluxes in the Z. capricorni community (average 34 mmol N2 m22 h21) were much lower than rates measured previously in summer about 1 km from the study area (199 mmol N2 m22 h21), but this is fairly consistent with the lower respiration rates (4980 mmol O2 m22 h21) compared to the previous study (11,021 mmol O2 m22 h21; see Eyre et al. 2011b for N2 efflux–respiration relationship). It is unknown if C. taxifolia communities, like Z. capricorni (see Discussion below), can maintain higher rates of denitrification at higher rates of respiration that might occur in areas with higher C. taxifolia biomass.
The similar dark rates of denitrification in C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni communities were surprising. The low water column nitrate concentrations in southern Moreton Bay (, 0.4 mmol L21; Eyre et al. 2011b) and associated small benthic NO {3 fluxes (Fig. 5) indicate that denitrifi- cation must be almost exclusively coupled to nitrification in the sediments. This is consistent with the strong control of benthic respiration on dark N2 effluxes (Fig. 6d), most likely reflecting an increased supply of NH z4 for coupled nitrification–denitrification, although it may also reflect the availability of electron donors for denitrification. The trend of higher N2 efflux for a given respiration rate in some cores from each habitat (Fig. 6d) may reflect macrofauna activity that would enhance denitrification (Eyre and Ferguson 2009). Macrofauna may also explain the very high dark N2 effluxes for a given respiration rate in two of the cores from site 1 in the bare sediments (outlier Fig. 6d).
High pore-water H2S and sediment AVS concentrations, low sediment redox, and low water column dissolved oxygen concentrations in C. taxifolia communities reflect highly reducing (anoxic) conditions (Chisholm et al. 1997; Gribben et al. 2009; McKinnon et al. 2009). The high AVS concentrations in the C. taxifolia community in this study were consistent with previous studies. We expected that such highly reducing conditions would limit the oxygen available for coupled nitrification–denitrification and free H2S might directly inhibit nitrification (Joye and Holli- baugh 1995). This is consistent with slurries that show low nitrifying activity in C. taxifolia beds (Chisholm et al. 1997), although the slurrying process would destroy any
three-dimensional sediment structure of adjacent oxic and anoxic areas necessary for coupled nitrification–denitrifi- cation (Eyre and Ferguson 2009).
The Z. capricorni community, which had similar respiration rates and organic matter concentrations (i.e., similar anoxic conditions) to the C. taxifolia community, can probably maintain nitrification by transporting oxygen to the rhizosphere (Frederiksen and Glud 2006; Eyre and Ferguson 2009). However, the higher dark denitrification rates of C. taxifolia community compared to the bare sediment, and similar rates compared to the Z. capricorni community, show that despite typical highly reducing conditions the C. taxifolia community must still have a three-dimensional structure, where there are adjacent oxic and anoxic zones, to maintain coupled nitrification– denitrification. Macrofauna may have maintained a three- dimensional structure at site 1 in the bare sediments where dark denitrification rates were similar to C. taxifolia and Z. capricorni (Eyre and Ferguson 2009). Oxygen has been measured within a C. taxifolia rhizosphere at 15-mm depth (Chisholm and Moulin 2003), suggesting that coupled nitrification–denitrification may occur in the upper sedi- ments in association with the C. taxifolia rhizosphere. The Z. capricorni community and bare sediments appear to be able to maintain higher denitrification rates in the light compared to the C. taxifolia community, but this may be an artifact of the lack of replication in the light due to missing samples.
Net DON fluxes in the Z. capricorni community and bare sediments were strongly correlated with O2-GPP (Fig. 6e) and O2-R (Fig. 6f), most likely reflecting hydro- lyzed fresh autochthonous organic matter (Blackburn et al. 1996; Eyre and Ferguson 2002; Eyre et al. 2011b). Net DOC effluxes were small in the Z. capricorni community and bare sediments (Fig. 3), resulting in effluxes with very low net DOC : DON ratios (average 1.1) and suggesting preferential release of high-molecular-weight, low C : N compounds during early diagenesis (Burdige and Zheng 1998). Similarly, low DOC : DON benthic efflux ratios have been measured in P. oceanica meadows (Apostolaki et al. 2010). Fresh organic matter could be sourced from the seagrass, epiphytes, and/or phytodetritus trapped in the seagrass canopy (Penhale and Smith 1977; Ziegler and Benner 1999; Barron et al. 2004). DON may also be released during grazing of benthic microalgae (Eyre and Ferguson 2002). In contrast, there was a smaller efflux, or uptake, of DON for a given O2-GPP in the C. taxifolia community, which reduced the strength of the relationship between O2-GPP (Fig. 6e) and O2-R (Fig. 6f), and net DON fluxes. In addition, light DOC effluxes from the C. taxifolia community were much larger than in the Z. capricorni community and bare sediments, resulting in high net DOC : DON efflux ratios (average 21.5). DOC effluxes in the C. taxifolia community were higher during the light, suggesting release of photosynthetic products from the rhizosphere (Chisholm and Moulin 2003). The higher DOC effluxes in the C. taxifolia community compared to the Z. capricorni community probably reflects lower utilization of carbon derived from C. taxifolia detritus (Oakes et al. in press). Light uptake of DON could be through directuptake by C. taxifolia (Chisholm and Moulin 2003) and/or BMA (Linares 2005; Eyre et al. 2008, 2011b).
Phosphorus cycling—Net DIP was weakly negatively correlated with O2-p/r (Fig. 7a), reflecting less efflux as the benthic community becomes more autotrophic. Similar patterns have been seen in many systems (Eyre and Ferguson 2002; Engelsen et al. 2008). The ratio of DIN to DIP efflux decreased as the benthic community became more autotrophic, and the ratio increased as the benthic community became more heterotrophic. As such, benthic production pushes the water column toward nitrogen limitation with DIN : DIP efflux ratios falling below Redfield (16 : 1) above an O2-p/r of 0.7. The relationship between O2-p/r and dark DIN : DIP ratios is consistent across all three benthic habitats (Fig. 7b) and a similar,
although weaker, relationship holds for net DIN : DIP flux ratios (r2 5 0.30, p , 0.05, n 5 27). Net DOP fluxes show no significant differences among the three habitats, but combined with the higher net effluxes of DOC in the C. taxifolia communities resulted in high DOC:DOP ratios (average 257) in C. taxifolia habitats, consistent with photosynthetic exudates.
Summary
Our results support the notion that when C. taxifolia invades an area of bare sediment there will be a large increase in the GPP and NPP and the benthic community will change from net heterotrophic to net autotrophic. In southern Moreton Bay there were greater dark benthic N2 effluxes among the C. taxifolia communities compared to bare sediment. There was also significantly more dark benthic NH z4 efflux in bare sediments than in C. taxifolia. C. taxifolia invasion of bare sediments would also enhance nitrogen limitation by decreasing the benthic DIN:DIP efflux ratio below Redfield (16:1). Benthic N2 efflux, via both canonical denitrification and anammox, is particular- ly important with respect to ecosystem function because it permanently removes fixed nitrogen and, as such, counter- acts the process of nitrogen over-enrichment (commonly the limiting nutrient). C. taxifolia invasion of bare sediments in southern Moreton Bay appears to have a beneficial role in removing excess nitrogen via enhancement of denitrification.
When C. taxifolia invades an area previously occupied by Z. capricorni at a similar density, community conditions would likely be similar to when the Z. capricorni was growing there. The exact sources of primary production in C. taxifolia communities is unknown, and little is known about the role of C. taxifolia in supporting microbial and macrofaunal food chains (see Oakes et al. in press); clearly areas for further research. There would also be little change in benthic N2 and NH z4 effluxes, or nutrient limitation, but further work is required to determine if this generality holds under changed conditions such as higher rates of GPP and associated R that might be associated with higher biomass. However, C. taxifolia invasion of an area that was once inhabited by a Z. capricorni community would likely result in significant changes in quantity and quality (much higher ratios) of benthic DOC and DON fluxes. The larger DOC efflux in the C. taxifolia community than in the Z. capricorni community suggests a larger export of carbon following C. taxifolia invasion (see Oakes et al. in press). DOC is important for the connectivity between benthic seagrass and pelagic compartments (Ziegler and Benner 1999) and seagrass and other benthic habitats (Eyre et al. 2011a). Some of the DOC release by C. taxifolia may contain toxic secondary metabolites (primarily caulerpe- nyne to discourage herbivory; Amade and Lemee 1998), which can reduce the productivity of macrophytes (Ferrer et al. 1997) and may also reduce microbial diversity. DON is an important source of nitrogen for both heterotrophic and autotrophic communities in oligotrophic coastal systems with low concentrations of DIN (Eyre et al. 2011b). As such, any changes in the quality and quantity ofbenthic DOC and DON fluxes associated with C. taxifolia invasion have the potential to affect the functioning of coastal ecosystems.
