xabstract
We document the regeneration of native freshwater wetland plant assemblages following removal of the common reed, Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steudel from two sites at Chapman Pond, East Haddam, Connecticut, USA. We gathered field data on composition of the vegetation 1 year before and for each of the 3 years after the removal in fall 1995/spring 1996 of Phragmites by two slightly different methods (hand-removal and herbiciding in one area, mowing/mulching and herbiciding in another). An area where Phragmites was left intact was similarly monitored. Our goals for this monitoring were: (1) to document plant species composition and richness before and after Phragmites removal and (2) to examine temporal and spatial variability in patterns of plant recruitment. Phragmites declined in both density and extent in both plots where removal treatments were applied. Richness, evenness, and density of non-Phragmites species increased steadily from 1996 to 1997 in all removal and intact plots. However, the species composition of the removal plots was richer than that of the intact plot, and more closely resembled that of comparable, uninvaded freshwater tidal wetlands. Rates of recovery of species richness in the removal plots declined from 1997 to 1998, potentially reflecting saturation of available colonization space, or the return of Phragmites. Phragmites has expanded its range in both of the removal plots since 1997. A model of its colonization indicates that Phragmites occupies space through localized proliferation of dense rhizomes rather than diffusely foraging with long tillers. Vigilance in monitoring is needed to document the spread of invasives, to evaluate the multi-faceted ecological effects of eradication efforts on both the invader and the regenerating community, and develop strategies for preventing re-invasion.

xintroduction
This study documents the regeneration of native fresh- water wetland plant assemblages following removal of the common reed, Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steudel. Phragmites is becoming a widespread dominant plant of freshwater to mesohaline marshes throughout the eastern United States (Chambers et al., in press). Although Phragmites has been present in North American wetlands for thousands, if not mil- lions, of years (Niering et al. 1977; Orson et al. 1987),
this species appears to have accelerated its colonization of wetlands in the past century (Marks et al. 1994; Prisloe and Barrett 1998). Its rapid recent expansion in the United States may be explained by multiple factors, including widespread alteration of hydrologic flows, disturbance of wetland sediments through ditch- ing and reclamation, increases in nutrient inputs that favor its competitive ability, and/or the introduction of novel genetic variants that are competitively supe- rior to native vegetation (reviewed by Chambers et al. 1999).Phragmites poses a concern particularly where it forms extensive, mono-specific stands and threatens to dominate wetlands that support rich assemblages of native plant and animal species. In these situations, Phragmites competitively depresses the growth and diversity of native plant species and may displace them altogether, leading to declines in overall richness of native plant taxa (Stalter and Baden 1994; Windham 1995; Meyerson et al., in press). In order to protect and restore wetland communities, especially those that harbor species of conservation significance, many agencies are beginning to undertake small- and large- scale efforts to control Phragmites.
Despite these burgeoning efforts to eradicate Phrag- mites from several sites around North America, lit- tle published, quantitative information is available on the recovery of native communities following its removal. The few studies we encountered in an exhaus- tive literature search document the effect of removal treatments on population densities and mortality of Phragmites itself (Bongiorno et al. 1984; Boone et al. 1987; Randall and Lapin 1995), or on other trophic levels (e.g., Ditlhogo et al. 1992), but do not follow regeneration and community assembly of native wet- land species. Cowie et al. (1992) found that cutting and burning of reeds in Norfolk, UK, promoted floristic diversity and richness of marsh plants. Interestingly, reed densities were higher and reed stature lower in the managed plots, which begs the hypothesis that Phrag- mites dominates competitively due to its stem height and capacity to attenuate light rather than its density and ability to capture soil resources.
We may also derive lessons by observing changes in plant species composition of native wetlands where Phragmites is declining without intervention. For example, Phragmites clones vary widely in their longevity (Haslam 1971) and the reed is disappear- ing from portions of its former range in Britain, with concomitant declines in reed-associated fauna (Bibby and Lunn 1982; Boar et al. 1989; Hartog et al. 1989; Ostendorp 1989). Again, however, research largely focuses on the status of Phragmites or associated rare consumer species exclusively, and data on regeneration of native plant communities are lacking. It is difficult to measure the success of restoration attempts without reference to comparative data on vegetation commu- nity composition. Unfortunately, many reports from restoration and monitoring projects do not appear in the published literature where they might otherwise be more widely accessible.
Quantitative studies documenting community suc- cession and patterns of Phragmites re-growth are crit- ically needed, particularly in plant communities that harbor rare species. Ideally, these studies should follow community recovery over multiple growing seasons, because species composition, especially in complex assemblages, is likely to vary over time. Working at the Chapman Pond Preserve, which encompasses a freshwater tidal marsh, staff and volunteers with the Connecticut Field Office of The Nature Conservancy (TNC) have gathered field data on the composition of the vegetation 1 year before and for each of the 3 years after the removal, by two different methods, of Phragmites. An area where Phragmites was left intact has been similarly monitored. Our goals for this moni- toring were to document plant species composition and patterns of species richness and dominance both before and after Phragmites removal, and to examine temporal and spatial variability in patterns of plant recruitment and community structure over several years.

xmethods
The site
Located in East Haddam, Connecticut, Chapman Pond is an approximately 24-ha freshwater embayment of the Connecticut River (Figure 1). The pond receives freshwater inputs from tidal fluctuations in the river and from upland terrestrial sources through 3 perennial streams. Tidal amplitude is approximately 0.75 m, but standing water levels on the marsh vary with rainfall and river stage. Fringing the open pond is an exten- sive freshwater tidal marsh of approximately 53 ha, a natural community type that is the focus of substan- tial conservation effort by The Nature Conservancy and other partners within the Tidelands of the lower Connecticut River. We studied vegetation composition of the emergent freshwater marsh comprising this tidal wetland matrix. This marsh encompasses one of the largest remaining stands of wild rice (Zizania aquatica) in the lower Connecticut River, and four state-listed rare plant species and several rare insect species are also recorded from the marsh.
Phragmites australis is first visible (in aerial pho- tographs) at the north-west margin of Chapman Pond in 1965; it was not visible in photographs from 1934 and 1951 (Prisloe and Barrett 1998). Total coverage of Phragmites has increased in area from 0.42 to 1.44 ha(203%) from 1968 to 1994, according to estimates by Prisloe and Barrett (1998) using geographic infor- mation systems. Three distinct stands of Phragmites currently occupy the site; it is unknown if these are genetically distinct clones. The northern stand (con- taining removal plot 1) occurs on soft clay and peat substrate bordered by swamp forest (principally Salix nigra and Acer rubrum) at the upland, and intertidal herbaceous vegetation (primarily Pontederia cordata, Sagittaria latifolia and Leersia oryzoides) at its pond- ward margin. The middle stand (containing removal plot 2) occurs on more resistant peat in which the large grasses Zizania aquatica, Typha latifolia, and Leersia oryzoides are the predominant plant species present. The southern stand (containing intact plot 3) is a dense, mono-dominant stand of Phragmites bordering a com- munity of herbaceous vegetation that resembles the profile of the middle stand, on similar substrate.
Phragmites removal
Perceiving that Phragmites directly threatened species of the native wetland, The Nature Conservancy had been conducting periodic small-scale cutting of the pond-ward perimeter of the northern Phragmites stand since 1986. This cutting had slowed but not stopped the eastern expansion of this Phragmites stand. In August, 1995, The Nature Conservancy and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection initiated her- bicide treatments in the northern and the middle Phrag- mites stands. A 1% solution of Rodeo (Monsanto, Inc.; active herbicidal compound glyphosate) was applied to standing Phragmites stems using a hand-held sprayer. In the northern stand (hereafter referred to as plot 1), herbicide was sprayed at the pond-ward margin from a boat. In the middle stand (hereafter referred to as plot 2), herbicide was sprayed from a low-ground-pressureamphibious vehicle. Following herbicide application late in the growing season, each stand was mulched in place during the subsequent spring. Plot 1 was sub- jected to hand-cutting, and whole, felled stems were left in place. Plot 2 was mowed using a Seppi mower, which shreds the plant material into fine pieces. Thus, each stand received slightly different removal treat- ments occurring on a comparable spatial scale. Each treatment removed on the order of 0.4 ha of Phragmites (Paul Capotosto, CT DEP, personal communication), but left a portion of the original Phragmites stand in place. An entire Phragmites stand was left intact in the southern sector of Chapman Pond (hereafter referred to as plot 3), and monitored similarly to the removal plots.
Vegetation monitoring
In 1995, prior to initiating concerted removal efforts, data were collected on plant species composition in the three stands of Phragmites. Vegetation sampling methods were similar in each of the plots, with base- line and transect length sensitive to the shape and total area of the Phragmites or removal zone. A permanent 100 m baseline was established through each Phrag- mites stand, and points for up to 10 perpendicular line transects, extending into the area occupied by the cur- rent Phragmites stand, were chosen randomly along the baseline (Figure 2). Up to 10 1 × 1 m quadrats were then randomly arrayed along each transect line to a maximum distance of 60 m away from the baseline (total N = 50 quadrats/plot). Within each quadrat, numbers of all live standing stems of all plant specieswere counted. When densities of ramets per quadrat exceeded 200, we estimated the number of stems per square meter by censusing 0.5 × 0.5 m subquadrats. Stem counts were used in preference to visual esti- mates of percent cover due to the diversity of mor- phologies present in each quadrat and the fact that most quadrats showed near 100% cover and considerable vertical overlap of plants. Sampling took place each year (1995–1998) in late summer, and the same data were recorded at each date (transect placement varied randomly). Following Phragmites removal in 1996, each permanent baseline in plots 1 and 2 occupied the edge of the remaining stand and permanent tran- sects extended out into the removal area. Inspection of grids displaying the distribution of the randomly- placed quadrats within each plot from 1995–1998 indi- cates that we achieved comparable spatial coverage of the same area from year to year.
As the foregoing description makes clear, these sam- pling regimes were not strictly replicated because the original design precluded the use of multiple treat- ment replicates due to a number of constraints on cost and personnel. Because of this pseudoreplica- tion (sensu Hurlbert 1984), apparent differences in response attributable to differences in treatment type cannot be distinguished from a priori inter-site differ- ences. While strong inferences cannot be made about the precise relationship between treatment type and patterns of community regeneration and Phragmites re-growth, the pre- and post-treatment data do speak to treatment efficacy, and the long-term post-treatment data on community ecology are informative.
We tested the null hypotheses that: (1) vegetation structure, including species richness, composition, and dominance patterns would not differ among intact and removal areas; and (2) structure would not differ before and after Phragmites removal. Data were ana- lyzed using Systat version 7.0 and StatXact version 3.0 for Windows. Data were transformed as necessary to conform to assumptions of analysis of variance, and ANOVA with Scheffe ́ post-hoc multiple-comparisons testing was used; otherwise, non-parametric tests were employed to distinguish treatment effects.

xresults
Effects of removal on Phragmites australis
Density of live stems of Phragmites australis were similar in all three plots prior to initiation of removaltreatments in 1995, and remained at between 35 and 45
stems/m2 between 1995 and 1998 in the intact plot 3. In
contrast, the density of Phragmites stems declined sig-
nificantly in both removal plots 1 and 2 between 1995
and 1996 (Mann–Whitney U-test, P < 0.0001 for
each plot). In 1996, plots 1 and 2 did not differ signif-
icantly; treatments had reduced Phragmites densities
to similarly low levels. In subsequent years, the mean
density of Phragmites stems/m2 remained significantly
lower in the removal plots 1 and 2 than in the intact
plot 3 (Figure 3). However, removal plot 2 exhibited
significantly lower mean densities of Phragmites than
removal plot 1 in 1997 (Kruskal–Wallis test statistic
χ2 = 22.92, P < 0.0001) and in 1998 (χ2 = 12.07, 22
P < 0.0001).
Three-dimensional plots show the temporal and spa-
tial dynamics of Phragmites decline and re-growth in the removal plots 1 and 2 (Figure 4). It was possible to visualize through these graphs the gradual increase in stem density occurring from the edges of the remaining stand. In plot 1, Phragmites stems recruited in a wave running parallel to the eastern edge of the remaining stand, toward the shore of Chapman Pond. In contrast, Phragmites stems began to increase in density at two edges running perpendicular to the unherbicided edge of plot 2.
Because quadrats were not placed at the same posi- tions each year, it was problematic to estimate lin- ear rates of Phragmites colonization into new space. We modeled the recruitment dynamics of Phragmites in plot 1 using a 3-parameter logistic non-linearregression model [equation: y = a/(1 + (x/x0)b), where a (y asymptote) and b (slope) and x0 (posi- tion of inflection point) are estimated parameters, y is stem density, and x is distance in meters from base- line]. Figure 5 illustrates the curves fitted to sampling points; models explained between 24% and 54% of the variance in stem density. Density and extent of Phragmites remained similar between 1996 and 1997. However, stem density at points near the baseline increased in 1998, and the position of the leading edge of the stand (indicated by the inflection point declining from the asymptote) shifted almost 5 m between 1997 and 1998. This model demonstrates that Phragmites colonization occurred less through the recruitment of new, exploratory tillers foraging into open space than through the build-up of a dense phalanx (sensu Lovett- Doust 1981) of stems just behind the advancing front.
The re-colonization of Phragmites was also appar- ent in an increase in relative importance. In 1995, 100% of quadrats surveyed in plots 1 and 2 contained some Phragmites (density > 0 stems/m2). In 1996, removal treatments had reduced this occurrence to 36% of quadrats in plot 1 and 40% of quadrats in plot 2. In 1998, 64% of randomly surveyed quadrats in plot 1 and 45% of the quadrats in plot 2 contained Phragmites.
Regeneration of other wetland plant species following Phragmites removal
Prior to the removal treatments, the mean density of stems of species other than Phragmites was low in all plots (Figure 6). Plots initially exhibited differ- ent mean non-Phragmites stem densities (Kruskal– Wallis test statistic χ2 = 36.547, P < 0.0001), with plot 3 showing the highest number of stems per square meter. In the year just following removal, non- Phragmites stem densities remained low in all plots; removal plots 1 and 2 did not differ. In 1997, by con- trast, the density of non-Phragmites stems increased significantly in both removal plots 1 (Mann–Whitney U = 611.5, P < 0.0001) and 2 (Mann–Whitney U = 261.0, P < 0.0001), attaining similar values in both plots. In 1998, non-Phragmites stem densities continued to climb; however, removal plot 2 showed significantly higher mean densities than removal plot 1 (Mann–Whitney U = 787.0, P = 0.002).
To assess the putative impacts of Phragmites on other plant species, we evaluated whether Phragmites stem densities were correlated with the density of stems of non-Phragmites species. Due to a large numberof empty cells (i.e., Phragmites densities = 0), the data were converted to quintiles, and the Jonckheree– Terpstra exact test for R × C doubly-ordered con- tingency tables (Mehta and Patel 1995) was used to examine whether stem densities co-varied non- randomly and to explicitly address the hypothesis that the density of non-Phragmites stems was dependent upon the density of Phragmites stems. The density of non-Phragmites species was inversely related tothe density of Phragmites stems in quadrats of both removal plots, in both 1997 (Standardized JT(x) = −4.125, P < 0.0001 for plot 1; JT(x) = −2.19, P = 0.017 for plot 2) and 1998 (JT(x) = −3.34, P = 0.0003 for plot 1; JT(x) = −3.347, P = 0.0002 for plot 2).
Patterns of mean richness of non-Phragmites stems paralleled those of densities after the removal treat- ments (Figure 7). Immediately following Phragmites removal, mean species richness per quadrat declined significantly in both plots 1 and 2. Species richnessalso declined significantly in intact plot 3, for reasons that are unclear. In 1997 and 1998, species richness increased in both removal plots, while remaining low in intact plot 3. Removal plot 1 consistently showed lower species richness than removal plot 2 in 1997, and this disparity increased in 1998 (Figure 7).
Cumulative species richness encountered across all quadrats in each plot was plotted as a species–effort curve for each year (Figure 8). The asymptotic form
of the curves confirmed that our sampling captured true species richness in all plots. Removal plots 1 and 2 contained qualitatively similar numbers of total species in all years, but the cumulative totals dropped between 1997 and 1998 in both plots. Total number of species found in the intact plot 3 increased from 1996 to 1998, potentially indicating recruitment of new species into the established Phragmites stand over time.As species richness increased, the community com- position of the marsh assemblage changed in the removal plots (Figure 9). Immediately following the removal treatments in 1996, Phragmites, Peltandra virginica, the vine Mikania scandens, and the fern Ono- clea sensibilis (the latter three are typical constituents of a Phragmites understory) occurred most frequently in the quadrats of both areas; other vegetation remained very sparse. One and two years after removal, Leersia oryzoides, Pontederia cordata, Bidens connata, and Zizania aquatica had gained prominence in the marsh. Spearman rank correlations performed on quadrat occurrence data for species that were encountered both in 1997 and 1998 showed that ranks remained stable among years in plots 1 and 2 (Spearman’s τ = 0.809, P < 0.0001, N = 27). That is, a species was likely to occur at the same frequency in 1998 as in 1997. Coeffi- cients of variation for species occurrence dropped from 2.7 to 1.3 after 1996, indicating a more even distribu- tion of species in the removal plots. Onoclea sensibilis remained the dominant non-Phragmites species in the intact plot 3. All other species occurred at very low frequencies in plot 3, yielding a correspondingly high coefficient of variation (Figure 9).
We also explored whether the species composition was similar in both of the recovering marsh areas. Jaccard indices (ranging from 0, for dissimilar pro- files, to 1, for identical compositions) were com- puted from information on the number of species that were shared by plots 1 and 2 in the years follow- ing Phragmites removal. The species composition of the regenerating assemblages was moderately simi- lar among the two plots in 1997 (Jaccard index = 0.629) and 1998 (Jaccard index = 0.563). Plot 2 contained species in the genera Carex, Cyperus, and Juncus not present in plot 1 in both years, while Eleocharis spp. and Mikania scandens occurred uniquely in plot 1. In order to assess whether the species composition of this regenerating marsh com- munity bore resemblance to that recorded for similar uninvaded freshwater tidal wetlands, we compiled a full list of plant species encountered and compared it to a list of species from sites in the Connecticut River tidelands given by Barrett (1994). We sam- pled in areas of Chapman Pond that correspond most closely with the Polygonum, Hypericum, and Sagittaria typologies distinguished by Barrett (1994). We identi- fied 53 species of vascular plants, including 4 non- angiosperms (ferns and horsetails), during our surveys from 1995 to 1998 (Table 1). During reconnaissancein 1993, Barrett (1994) described 56 angiosperm species (no non-angiosperms were enumerated). Forty species are shared between the two lists; that is, we found 71.4% of his listed angiosperm species regen- erating in the removal plots. Jaccard indices indi- cated a similarity of 0.579 between the regenerating wetland at Chapman Pond and other documented freshwater tidal wetlands along the Connecticut River (Barrett 1994). Importantly, wild rice (Zizania aquat- ica), whose growth The Nature Conservancy sought to encourage by removing Phragmites, returned in force, especially in plot 2. Its importance rank increased from 16 in 1996, to 11 in 1997, and 5 in 1998 (Figure 9).

xdiscussion
We asked several questions in compiling these data on the composition of the freshwater tidal marsh atChapman Pond. First, did the removal treatments have a measurable effect on the prevalence and den- sity of Phragmites australis? Second, how did the species richness and composition of the flora change in the years following Phragmites removal relative to the stand where Phragmites was left intact? Third, is Phragmites returning to the sites from which it was removed, and, if so, how is it impacting the non-Phragmites vegetation?
Herbiciding and cutting of Phragmites stems in late summer 1995 and spring 1996 resulted in significant, transient declines in the density and extent of the stands of reed in both plots relative to the intact plot (Figures 3 and 4). Despite slight methodological differences in the treatments, these effects were initially similar among the plots.
Species other than Phragmites were very sparse in all plots prior to the treatments, and remained so in the intact plot 3 throughout the sampling period. Both stem densities (Figure 6) and species richness per quadrat (Figure 7) were significantly depressed where Phragmites occurred, but both increased steadily after 1996. We were fortunate to be able to com- pare the composition of the post-removal vegeta- tion to data recorded by Barrett (1994) in Chapman Pond and other tidal wetlands along the Connecticut River; and to demonstrate that the recovering assem- blage bore substantial resemblance to uninvaded sites (Table 1).
The regeneration of a species-rich assemblage of plants in the gap created by Phragmites removal prob- ably occurred, following a lag in 1996, by recruitment from a combination of seed bank sources and peren- nating buds that may have remained viable even under conditions of Phragmites dominance (van der Valk and Pederson 1989; Barrett 1994). No steps were taken following herbiciding to physically restore the site to a preferred species composition, so the regeneration that occurred reflects a lottery process of recruitment from the different source pools existing at the different plots. Despite probable differences in substrate and flooding regime (not quantified in this study), the removal plots each attained a more diverse and more even species composition relative to that observed before the treat- ments and to that of plot 3 (Figure 9). There was con- siderable year-to-year change in the composition and richness of all three assemblages, however (Figures 7 and 8), and plot 1 consistently showed fewer species than plot 2. We cannot attribute these differences to treatment effects due to the original pseudoreplicateddesign; but future studies should examine fine-scale treatment effects carefully.
It is of interest that the cumulative richness of non- Phragmites species increased from 1995 to 1998 in the intact stand (Figure 8). Clearly, Phragmites did not exclude all other freshwater tidal wetland species. It is conceivable that new species were introduced into the understory as researchers created new paths into the Phragmites stand over the years of sampling; the effects of trampling and disturbance should be investigated in other studies. Several vine and fern species (especially the sensitive fern, Onoclea sensibilis) appear to col- onize and persist in the understory of a Phragmites stand (Figure 9). These species may increasingly serve as the source bank for new recruits if a Phragmites stand is allowed to occupy an area for several years prior to removal, leading to the regeneration of a very different assemblage from the ones observed in this study.
Multiple years of monitoring also make it clear that Phragmites can re-invade sites following removal (Figure 4). The source of new Phragmites stems likely resides with the remnant stand, as recruitment from seed is uncommon in this species (Galinato and van der Valk 1986), and evidence for the support of new shoots by physiological integration with the parent clone is strong (Hara et al. 1993). Demography of individual Phragmites ramets could not be followed in this study, but a model of Phragmites movement constructed from plot 1, where stand expansion was particularly tractable, is revealing (Figure 5). Rather than sending out long tillers from the leading edge of the stand into uncolonized space, Phragmites at Chapman Pond appears to gain dominance by increas- ing the density of stems behind an advancing front (Figure 5). This phalanx of stems appears to advance several meters per year at this site [which is consistent with independent estimates of spatial spread (Prisloe and Barrett 1998)]. The rate of movement will likely be affected by substrate conditions and the composi- tion of the flora with which it may compete. Such a mode of growth may reflect the normal growth pat- tern of the species and/or a response to herbciding or mowing. Cowie et al. (1992) found that cutting reed (without herbicide) induced an increase in stem density; however, these stems were shorter than those of untreated stands (1.4m tall) and did not appear to suppress the growth of other vegetation. Where Phragmites remains tall (in excess of 3 m at Chapman Pond) as well as dense, it significantly reduces lightavailability to plants in the understory (Farnsworth and Meyerson, unpublished data) and thus may depress growth and seed germination. Spatially explicit, multi- year data like those collected here can inform mod- els of invasion and spread (Hastings 1996), and are needed to assess if and when re-treatment is necessary. This study demonstrates that a diverse freshwater tidal marsh can regenerate in the wake of Phragmites inva- sion and removal, but also cautions that monitoring and publication of data from multiple sites are needed to provide convincing measures of success and to detect re-invasion.
