xabstract


 This study aimed to understand how the introduction of Cichla kelberi in Rosana Reservoir (Paranapanema River)

affected the native ichthyofauna. Data on the structure of the small fish fauna assemblage were obtained before and

after the introduction of this carnivorous species. Samplings were carried out in February and September of 2004,

previously to the register of Cichla kelberi in the reservoir, and after its introduction, November of 2004, January,

March, May and August of 2005, February and June of 2006, February and July of 2007, February and October of 2008

and February of 2009. A total of 4,693 fish, belonging to 43 different species was sampled between 2004 and 2009.

The order Characiformes was the most abundant, followed by Perciformes and Siluriformes. Comparative analyses,

before and after the introduction, could not demonstrate significant changes in composition, richness, abundance,

biomass, mean length and diversity of fish. Aquatic insects were the main feeding item of C. kelberi, followed by

tetragonopterinae fish. Cannibalism was recorded during the whole study period. The results showed that Cichla

cannot deeply affect the ichthyofauna assemblages of a large Neotropical reservoir, at least in a short or medium term

period after its introduction. The results also allowed concluding that the introduction of C. kelberi in the reservoir is

in the phase 3. In this phase, the specie can survive and reproduce in the new environment; however it is not totally

established and disseminated. The reasons for the fact that Cichla is still not dominant in Rosana Reservoir could

be related to feeding competition, high rate of cannibalism and the presence of large amount of aquatic macrophytes

(refuge zones). In spite of the results, the continuous monitoring of the role of non-native species on the local fish fauna

is absolutely necessary because the impacts caused by colonization of this undesirable species can be magnified by

complex processes, usually correlated with other environmental disturb, especially the negative effects of damming. xintroduction River regulation represents one of the major impacts on

fish fauna and can drastically change the species composition

and abundance. Some species cannot survive to the newly

created environment while others can become excessively

abundant (Ahearn et al., 2005; Agostinho et al., 2008).

Another serious damage for the ichthyofauna is the

introduction of non-native species. The introduction of

non-native fish species can cause the decline or even the

extinction of native fish populations, the biotic homogenization

- the replacement of endemic native species by widespread

distributed exotic species (Gido and Brown, 1999; Olden

and Poff, 2004; Marchetti et al., 2006; McKinney, 2006;

Smith, 2006; Light and Marchetti, 2007).

Biotic invasion, as a consequence of human activities,

is an over century phenomenon (Simberloff, 2003).

Since the Roman Empire, introduction of fish into alien

environments have been mediated by boat displacement,

importation of aquarium fish, aquaculture activities

based on exotic species, releases for biological control,

releases for fisheries improvement, construction of

inter-catchment canals for water transportation, pipes and

tunnels (Ruesink, 2005; Brasher et al., 2006; Jeschke and

Strayer, 2006; Stohlgren et al., 2006). Exotic fishes are

positively associated with man-made reservoirs, generally

due to stocking for sport fishing and inundation of natural

barriers, such large waterfalls (Pringle et al., 2000;

Leprieur et al., 2006). Above dam populations of exotics

usually have higher abundance than the ones living below

dam (Holmquist et al., 1998).

In the last years the introduction of the Amazonian

peacock-bass species (Cichla spp.) in Neotropical reservoirs

has been considered as a major problem (Kullander and

Ferreira, 2006). Cichla is an exceptionally voracious predator

and studies showed that its introduction may seriously threat

the native fish, compromising the assemblage diversity or

even causing the complete regional extinction of several

species (Zaret and Paine, 1973; Godinho et al., 1994;

Santos et al., 1994; Latini and Petrere Junior, 2004; Pelicice

and Agostinho, 2009).

Nevertheless, quantitative analysis of the dispersion

and establishment of non-native fish in a wide spatial and

temporal scale is still rare. The complete understanding

of the process is crucial for prediction, and maybe the

avoidance, of further expansion of invasive species and biotic

homogenization in aquatic ecosystems (Han et al., 2008).

The proposal of the present study is to evaluate the

potential negative impact of the introduction of Cichla kelberi

Spix and Agassiz, 1831 in Rosana Reservoir, Paranapanema

River. The aim is to understand how Cichla affects the small

size ichthyofauna, comparing the assemblage structure

before and after (in a relatively long term) the introduction.

Additional information on the small size fish assemblage

distribution and ecological attributes and limnological

characteristic of the study environment is provided by

Ferrareze and Nogueira (2011) and Ferrareze et al. (2014),

respectively. 


xmethods The study area is located in the upstream (tail) zone

of Rosana Reservoir, approximately 80 km above dam

(Figure 1), which is located at 22∞ 36í S and 52∞ 52í W.

The reservoir is the last one, from a series of eleven

along the Paranapanema River (SP/PR, Brazil), with a

surface area of 276 km2 (watershed of 11,000 km2), water

retention time of 21 days (annual mean values), shallow

(maximum of 26 m close to the dam) and oligo-mesotrophic

(Nogueira et al., 2006).

The climate is subtropical humid (average temperature

of 21 ∞C) with two pronounced seasons, a dry weather

predominates from April to August (autumn/winter),

and the rains are concentrated in late spring and summer

(from November to March) (Ferrareze et al., 2014). The samplings were carried out in February and September

of 2004, previously to the register of Cichla kelberi in the

Rosana Reservoir (Casatti et al., 2003; Pelicice et al., 2005),

and in November of 2004 (register of the first occurrence

of this species) (Pelicice and Agostinho, 2009), January,

March, May and August of 2005, February and June of

2006, February and July of 2007, February and October

of 2008 and February of 2009.

The study was carried out in 4 lagoons and one sampling

station in Paranapanema River (PR), close to the river bank

(Figure 1; Table 1). Two kinds of lagoons were assessed:

3 natural lagoons and one originated by the flood of mining

digging (FPA). The natural lagoons (FPB and FPD) are

located inside the State Park of Morro do Diabo, while the

last one (FPC) is located in an area influenced by human

activities (agriculture and cattle breeding). The dominant

macrophytes of each lagoon, in terms of stand area, were

registered (Table 1). Identification of these plants was

performed at the genus level, with help of taxonomists

of Botany Department from Biosciences Institute of State

University of S„o Paulo, UNESP, Campus of Botucatu. Small fish were sampled with a net of 7.5m2

(1.5◊5m; 0.3 cm of mesh size). In each point/period five

manual throws were performed towards to the aquatic

macrophyte stands and in the limnetic zone.

In the laboratory, the organisms were transferred to

ethanol 70% for permanent storage. Voucher specimens

are deposited in the Freshwater Fish Collection of the

Department of Zoology, UNESP/Botucatu.

The biometry of the collected organisms was

obtained through measurements of weigh (biomass in g;

0.01g accuracy) and length (caliper, 0.1 mm) ñ standard

(except for Gymnotiformes and Synbranchiformes) and total.

For taxonomical identification of the fish species it was

used specialized literature (Britsk, 1972; Britsk et al., 1986,

1999; Reis et al., 2003; Nelson, 2006; GraÁa and Pavanelli,

2007) and the scientific collections of the UNESP/S„o

JosÈ do Rio Preto) and University of S„o Paulo Museum

of Zoology (MZUSP) were also consulted.

Numerical richness, abundance and biomass were

calculated for the communities, while the Index of

Importance (Nataragam and Jhingian, 1961, apud Beaumord

and Petrere Junior, 1994) was calculated for each species.

The Shannon index was calculated to estimate the fish

assemblage diversity of each lagoon for the distinct

sampling periods. This index is widely used in analyses

of communities structure (Magurran, 2004).

In order to describe the feeding preference of C. kelberi,

its diet was determined through stomach content analysis. The items were identified under a stereoscopic microscope

and microscope, trying to attain the most detailed taxonomic

level.

The mean values of the community variables were

calculated to synthesize the information and facilitate the

identification of patterns. The data were grouped by sampling

year. The representativeness of the means was assumed

based on the normal data distribution (Shapiro-Wilkís

W test) (Underwood, 1997; Statsoft, 2001), after previously

standardization (Logx+1).

Finally, a one-way ANOVA test was performed to

detect differences among periods. When differences were

detected, the Tukey test was applied to determine the level

of significance (Underwood, 1997). It was considered

significant difference values of p < 0.05 (Underwood, 1997),

which were mentioned in the results. The analyses were

performed using StatisticaTM 6.0 software (Statsoft, 2001). 


xresults A total of 4,693 fish, belonging to 43 species was

sampled between 2004 and 2009 (Table 2). The assemblages

were primarily composed by small-size species, due to

the chosen methodology. The order Characiformes was

the most abundant, totalizing 95.4% of the individuals,

followed by Perciformes, 2.5%, and Siluriformes, 1.2%.

Other orders represented only 0.9% of the individuals.

In terms of Species Importance, the main species was

Hemigrammus marginatus Ellis, 1911, which represented

about 37% of the total captures. Other abundant species were

Hyphessobrycon eques (Steindachner, 1882), Bryconamericus

stramineus Eigenmann, 1908 and Serrapinnus notomelas

(Eigenmann, 1915) for Characiformes; Crenicichla britskii

Kullander, 1982 for Perciformes; Hypostomus ancistroides

(Ihering, 1911) for Siluriformes and Gymnotus sylvius

Albert & Fernandes-Matioli, 1999 for Gymnotiformes.

A total of 899 individuals (21 species) were captured

in the period that preceded the introduction of C. kelberi

(before), while 3,994 individuals (43 species) were caught

in all subsequent periods. Thirty-seven individuals of

C. kelberi were captured along the study.

There were no differences between the fish richness

if compared the periods before and after the introduction

(p=0.86; Figure 2). The fish richness during the year of

2008 showed a remarkable decreasing (p=0.03). However,

this fact is probably not related to the Cichla introduction,

because the number of caught individuals of this species

during the mentioned period was low.

There were no difference between the fish abundance

before and after the introduction (p=0.55; Figure 3). It was

verified a decrease in the fish abundance when there was an

increase in the Cichla abundance. Posterior to the reduction

of Cichla, the assemblage abundance was reestablished.

The species H. marginatus, H. eques and C. britskii exhibited

higher decrease in abundance when the number of Cichla

specimens was elevated. Other observed particularity is

that most Cichla individuals were sampled in the lateral

lagoon with higher fish abundance (FPA).

The same pattern was observed in terms of fish biomass.

During the increase of Cichla population, the fish biomass

decreased; but the weight just reestablished when Cichla

abundance reduced. There was no significantly difference

between the fish biomass before and after the introduction

(p=0.677; Figure 4).

The introduction of Cichla did not interfere in the

mean length of fish (p=0.83; Table 2). The sampled species showed similar size before and after the introduction,

even during the period when Cichla abundance was high.

The fish assemblage composition did not change

after Cichla introduction. There was the predominance of

Characiformes, followed by Perciformes and Siluriformes in

all periods. Characiformes is more abundant in the lagoons,

while Perciformes, Siluriformes and Gymnotiformes

are more important in the river channel. The unique

difference was seen when the Cichla abundance raised,

the predominance of Characiformes was lower, due to

the decrease of H. marginatus. The Siluriformes was

the order that increased most after the introduction,

but this is probably associated with the higher number

samplings, as no species of this order was predominant

after the introduction. The relative abundance among the

taxonomic orders is presented in Figure 5, for the whole

sampling period.

The fish diversity was higher before the introduction of

Cichla (p=0.04; Figure 6). The number of the predominant

species (H. marginatus, H. eques and C. britskii) decreased,

what allowed other species of minor importance to

increase in abundance, such as Cyphocharax modestus

(Fern·ndez-YÈpez, 1948), Roeboides descalvadensis

Fowler, 1932 and Aphyocharax anisitisi Eigenmann and

Kennedy, 1903.

Finally, aquatic insects were the main feeding

item of C. kelberi, followed by fish of the sub-family

Tetragonopterinae. Cannibalism was recorded during the

whole study period. Detailed analyses of the assemblages

fish diet is provided by Ferrareze et al. (2015). 


xdiscussion
 The probability of a given species to become a well

succeeded invader is generally low, even rare. When the

event is rare, the prediction of the facts becomes hard,

because it depends not only on the prediction accuracy,

but also on the frequency that the event occurs (Colautti

and MacIsaac, 2004; Brasher et al., 2006).

When a species is introduced in a region, only a certain

number of individuals will survive and most of them will

fail to succeed. Thus, the damage of non native species

can just be evaluated after the real introduction, because

no one can be completely sure if the establishment of it

will occur (Colautti and MacIsaac, 2004; Jeschke and

Strayer, 2006).

In the Rosana Reservoir case, the results showed that

C. kelberi seems not to have had a significant effect on the

ichthyofauna, as predicted by Pelicice and Agostinho et al.

(2008).

Our results did not show statistically differences in the

ichthyofauna structure after the introduction of C. kelberi

in the reservoir. The diversity values even improved,

after the introduction. This fact happened due to the

decrease of the number of the most abundant species,

diminishing the competition and allowing the increase of

the abundance of some species with minor importance as

C. modestus, R. descalvadensis and A. anisitisi. However,

some tendencies of disturb could be observed, indicating

that this species can interfere in the local ichthyofauna.

According to McKinney (2006), when a high number of

predators found an opportunity to spread, they can produce

pronounced changes on the local fish community, and this

possibility cannot be neglected.

Firstly, it is interesting to note that a high number of

Cichla was found in the lagoon with the higher abundance

of small size fish. Second, when the Cichla abundance

was high, the abundance of the main species and the fish

biomass decreased, corroborating with the initial study of

the species impact in the Rosana Reservoir (Pelicice and

Agostinho, 2009).

The results allowed to conclude that the introduction

of Cichla kelberi in the reservoir is in the phase 3 (sensu

Colautti and MacIsaac, 2004). In this phase, the specie can

survive and reproduce in the new environment; however it is not established, disseminated and dominant. So, probably

Cichla is still not well established in the reservoir, and the

initial introduction effects were buffered by the plasticity

of the fish along the time (Ruesink, 2005).

It is difficult to point out the reasons to explain why

Cichla is not properly established, but it could be related

with the feeding competition, high rate of cannibalism

and the extensive presence of aquatic macrophytes in

the reservoir.

Juveniles of Cichla kelberi, as several other Neotropical

fish species, uses the aquatic insects as the main feeding

item and some of this species are highly specialized to

capture their prey, such as Gymnotus and Crenicichla.

Another fact is that the Tetragonipterinae, used by Cichla,

are also an important feeding item of Serrasalmus maculatus

Kner, 1858 and Hoplias malabaricus (Bloch, 1794)

(Ferrareze et al., 2015).

The feeding competition can reduce the prey

availability and raise the cannibalism (Novaes et al., 2004).

The cannibalism also can reduce the chances of surviving

of a non native fish in a new environment. The drastic

reduction of the introduced population, reduce the genetic

and morphologic variability, as well as the reproduction

success (Wootton, 1990; Santos et al., 2001).

Other important fact preventing Cichla to become

dominant in the reservoir is the presence of macrophytes,

as previously mentioned. The plant structures offer an

ideal environment for refuge and shelter for prey, mainly

for small sized fish, what makes harder their capture by

predators (Rozas and Odum, 1988; Schriver et al., 1995;

Ferrareze and Nogueira, 2011).

Therefore, the results showed that Cichla didnít impair

the whole ichthyofauna assemblages of a Neotropical

reservoir and changed the fish assemblage structure

immediately after its introduction (Ferrareze and Nogueira,

2011). But, the real problems about the introduction only

will be determined, when the process reaches the next steps

(4 and 5). When the species will reach these steps cannot

be determined (Colautti and MacIsaac, 2004).

The decrease in the ichthyofauna attributes verified

during the year of 2008, such as low richness, abundance,

biomass and diversity is probably resulted of the irregular

climate verified in that year. There were strong rains in

the wet period (from January to March) and a long dry

season in the winter/spring of 2008 (no published data).

These changes reflected on the ichthyofauna, promoting

the decrease of the ecological attributes, as verified in

other studies (Gafny et al., 2000; Barrella and Petrere

Junior 2003).

Despite of the inconclusive results to support the

hypothesis that Cichla kelberi has caused a significant

negative impact on the ichthyofauna of Rosana Reservoir,

the role of non native species in the local fish fauna should

be a major concern of aquatic ecology scientists and

environmental managers. The continuous monitoring of

non-native species is imperative, because in several cases,

the introduction reach the final phase, promoting drastic

changes in the local ichthyofauna (Zaret and Paine, 1973;

Kaufman, 1992; Macchi et al., 1999). Additionally, it must

be considered that the impacts caused by colonization of

this undesirable species can be magnified by complex

processes, usually correlated with other environmental

disturb (Byers, 2002; Shea and Chesson, 2002), especially

the negative effects of damming (Agostinho et al., 2007).

Nevertheless, the assumptions cannot be totally pessimist,

as the system has a natural resiliency that can minimize

disturbances (Odum, 2004).