xabstract
The ecological consequences of exotic plant invasion have focused largely on interactions with native plants or animals, whereas ecosystem level consequences, such as organic matter accumulation, soil nitrogen (N) transformations, hydrological fluctuation and changes in surface water chemistry remain largely unknown. We studied the invasion of exotic emergent plant purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) in a freshwater wetland dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia). Transects were set in Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge, NY that originated in a pure Typha area, crossed over mixed zone, and extended into a pure Lythrum area. Comparing monotypic plots, there was significantly more standing-dead biomass of Lythrum than Typha (1.88 kg m 2 versus 0.59 kg m 2); while collapsed dead Typha shoots formed a layer of litter which was absent in the Lythrum area. Soil organic matter content was significantly higher in Lythrum sediment than in Typha sediment (35.2 kg m 2 versus 27.5 kg m 2, down to 20 cm deep). Average monthly N mineralization rates were significantly higher in the Lythrum plots than in Typha plots (911 mg N m 2 versus 638 mg N m 2). N transformations were also controlled by local hydrology. Net N mineralization rates were more than doubled when water table dropped to expose the sediment to the atmosphere, and ammonium production was changed to nitrate production. Surface water NH4+ and NO3  concentrations remained low in all sites, suggesting strong plant uptake by both species. In a concurrent greenhouse study, we found Lythrum plants transpired about twice the amount of water as Typha, and had above- and below-ground biomass that more than doubled that of Typha. The combined field and greenhouse studies suggest that Lythrum invasion may cause changes in organic matter distribution, N cycling and water chemistry in freshwater wetlands.

xintroduction
Exotic plant species invasion is one of the global environmental problems strongly associated with increasing human activity and has large local/regional ecological and economic consequences (Mack et al., 2000). Such impacts are found in New York State, the Great Lakes region and across the United States as purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) proliferates and takes over habitats in freshwater wetlands. Originally introduced from Europe in the 1800’s, Lythrum has spread quickly, possibly through inter-connected canals and widely distributed road systems, and populated many of North America’s wetlands (Stuckey, 1980). Its invasion into a wetland frequently suppresses native plant communities and results in the eventual alteration of the wetland’s structure and function (Thompsonet al., 1987). The distribution and spread of Lythrum has been enhanced by the absence of natural enemies and an increase of disturbances to natural systems, frequently resulting in large monotypic stands at the expense of native flora (Malecki et al., 1993; Blossey, 1995). Additionally, the success of Lythrum often leads to a series of changes in arthropod, mammal and avian fauna - those rely on native primary producers for food, shelter or breeding/nesting sites (Thompson et al., 1987; Mal et al., 1992; Kiviat, 1996).
Less conspicuous, but potentially more important, are the consequences of Lythrum invasion to key ecosystem processes in freshwater wetlands, such as hydrologic flux, nutrient cycling and organic matter distribution (Mitsch and Gosselink, 2000). Studies in upland terrestrial ecosystems have demonstrated that dominant canopy species can substantially alter soil nutrient availability, organic matter accumulation, microclimate and ecosystem productivity (Van Bree- men and Finzi, 1998). Thus, the large biomass production usually associated with invasive plants could have a strong impact at the whole ecosystem level and consequently alter the competitive balance with native plants. Ehrenfeld et al. (2001) documented the invasion of Berberis thunbergii and Microstegium vimineum in the Northeast USA and the effects of these invasive species on soil pH, N mineralization and nitrification. The alteration of soil conditions (e.g., dramatic increases in nitrification rates by the invasive species) was shown to have a significant impact on the replacement of the native understory shrub Vaccinium pallidum by exotics, thus creating a positive feedback towards the spread of the invasive plants. In a tidal marsh wetland, Windham and Lathrop (1999) similarly documented that the invasion of Phragmites australis (common reed) into Spartina patens stands not only created 10 times more above-ground biomass, but also lowered soil salinity, water level and created less pronounced microtopographic relief and higher redox potentials. In a series subsequent studies, Windham and Ehrenfeld (2003) have shown that N supply from sediment were 300% greater in Phragmites stand than in Spartina patens stand and the increased N supply sustained greater N uptake by Phragmites plants and greater N immobilization by Phragmites litter.
Only a limited number of studies have focused on the ecosystem level consequences of purple loosestrife invasion in North America (Emery and Perry, 1996; Templer et al., 1998; Otto et al., 1999). Templer et al. (1998) studied the sediment chemistry beneath stands of Lythrum salicaria, Typha angustifolia and Phragmites australis in the fresh water tidal zones of the Hudson
River and found a substantial drop of ammonium in sediment porewater from spring to summer and significantly higher nitrogen concentrations and N mass in the plant tissue of Phragmites. At the same study site, Otto et al. (1999) found few differences in microbial biomass, activity and response to fertilizer addition underneath the different plants, but found significantly higher plant N mass in Phragmites and Lythrum than in Typha.
A change of ecosystem function, especially to N cycling, also has important practical implications. Beyond serving as wildlife habitat, inland freshwater wetlands are important sites for nutrient retention (Peverly, 1982; Johnston, 1991). The return of nutrients to the system in the form of litter tissue by wetland flora can directly affect changes in soil N chemistry (mineralization rates and pool size) through their influence on microbial activity (Groffman et al., 1996). This suggests that the drastic change in vegetative cover associated with invasion by purple loosestrife could alter long-term N retention by the soil. That is, by supplying a large quantity of litter material to the ecosystem of a differing quality than native species, purple loosestrife may alter the nature of the sediment organic matter (SOM) accumulation and the N cycling that takes place within its matrix.
We compared the differences in carbon (C) alloca- tion and N biogeochemistry in the soil and surface water in monotypic stands of Lythrum and native cattail (Typha latifolia) in the Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge, North Central New York. Typha is a common wetland plant in North American and is often the dominant species in the Great Lakes region prior to Lythrum invasion (Grace and Wetzel, 1982; Mal et al., 1992). In a companion greenhouse study, we also compared plant growth, N accumulation and C sequestration between the two species. These studies were intended to explore both the mechanisms of exotic species invasion and its consequences by examining the use of soil resources by both species and the alteration of resource availability after species replacement. We hypothesized that invasive Lythrum would have greater biomass production, higher N transformation rates and a stronger impact on N in surface water and sediments.

xmethods
2.1. Study site
Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge is located at the northern end of Cayuga Lake in Seneca County, New York State (438000 N, 768450 ) and has 5500 ha offreshwater wetland. The hydroperiod of the wetland fluctuates naturally as well as being managed for annual fall ‘let-downs’. Our study site was located in the northern edge of the Refuge which has several acres of monotypic stands of both Lythrum and Typha species growing beside one another with a ‘‘mixed zone’’ in between. The Lythrum colonization is at least 20 years old (Gingrich, personal communication) and both stands appear to be in a mature, ‘‘stable’’ condition (Fickbohm, personal observation). Five parallel trans- ects were created in May 2001 (each approximately 90 m long and 25 m apart). Beginning in the 100% Typha stand, each transect spanned over the mixed area and ended in the monotypic Lythrum stand. In the center and both ends of each transect, covering the respective Typha, mixed, Lythrum areas, we established one square meter plot to monitor plant growth and count the live and dead stem density, and an adjacent square meter plot for soil sampling.
2.2. Soil sampling
We used the intact core incubation method to quantify the in situ transformation of organic N to inorganic N (mineralization) during the growing season. At the beginning of each month (for the months of June, July and August, 2001), two plastic cores (20 cm length, 4.7 cm diameter) of sediment were taken from each soil plot (total 15 plots). One core was taken back to the lab and sectioned into top and bottom 10 cm strata. N extractions were performed within 24 h using 20 g fresh weight sub-samples from each stratum. Sub-samples were extracted for 1 h in 50 ml 1 M KCl on an Eberbach reciprocating shaker (Ann Arbor, MI). The solution was then filtered through Whatman GF/A paper, acidified with 0.2 ml of 6 M HCl, and refrigerated for later analyses of NH4-N and NO3-N. The other core at each sampling site was sealed with a rubber stopper on the bottom (to prevent leaching), a plastic bag on top (to prevent atmospheric deposition) and returned to the sediment for an incubation period of 1 month, after which it was retrieved and processed in the same manner.
The difference in the initial and final inorganic N concentrations was used, along with the respective sediment masses in the top and bottom 10 cm stratum, to calculate monthly net N mineralization rates. Concentrations from the initial cores were also used to establish extractable NH4-N and NO3-N pools for the beginning of each month. Additional 20 g sub-samples were oven-dried (Fisher Scientific Isotemp Oven) at 105 8C (48 h) to constant weight to calculate soil water
content and to convert soil mass from a fresh weight to dry weight basis. The dried soils were then ashed in a muffle furnace (Sybron/Thermolyne) at 550 8C (2 h) to determine soil organic matter (SOM) content (Loss-on- Ignition method).
2.3. Chemical analyses
Soil extracts were analyzed on a Lachat dual channel (one for NH4-N analysis, one for NO3-N) Flow Injection Autoanalyzer (QuikChem FIA 8000 Series, Milwaukee, WI). Ammonium analysis was based on the color reaction with alkaline phenol and sodium hypochlorite (Lachat Method 10-107-06-1-C) and nitrate analysis was based on the color reaction with sulfanilamide after being reduced to nitrite through a cadmium column (Lachat method 10-107-04-1-C, measures NO3  + NO2 ). Both methods have the detection limit of 0.01 mg N l 1.
2.4. Vegetation sampling in the field
In summer 2001, live and dead Lythrum stems and Typha shoots were counted along the transects in each square meter vegetation plot. Additionally, each month, we measured the height of 10 randomly selected live shoots in each plot (for mixed plot, 10 Lythrum stems and 10 Typha shoots were selected). Average stem height in each plot was calculated and used to estimate the relative growth rates for both species. In July 2002, when live plants were at their peak biomass, 20 live and 20 dead shoots of both Lythrum and Typha were harvested from 3 plots in the monotypic Lythrum and Typha stands and oven-dried at 60 8C for 72 h to constant dry weight. Above-ground standing biomass was estimated by multiplying the mean shoot weight (for both live and dead shoots) by the shoot density per plot.
2.5. Greenhouse experiment
Specimens collected from the Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge study site were grown in the research greenhouse of the State University of New York – Binghamton campus from June to September 2001. Second year Lythrum shoots, with rootstocks, were excavated from the field. Typha shoots of similar height were also excavated. Typha has an extensive rhizoma- tous structure (Grace and Wetzel, 1982), a portion of which was left attached to the shoot during excavation. Sediment was collected from a Typha marsh (Chenengo Forks, NY, 428820 , 758540 ) near the Binghamtoncampus and thoroughly mixed before planting. A total of 21 5 gal plastic buckets were set up, with 8 buckets designated for Typha and Lythrum, respectively, and 5 buckets used as no-plant controls. Two Lythrum and two Typha specimens were planted in their respective microcosms for a total of 16 Lythrum individuals and 16 Typha individuals for the whole study. All mesocosms received a one-time fertilization of 80.8 mg NH4NO3- N (diluted in 3.25l distilled water) to aid the establishment and growth of the transplanted speci- mens.
Both planted and non-planted microcosms were watered with 1 mg N l 1 NH4NO3 solution twice a week to a depth of 7.5 cm. The fixed water depth ensured continuous coverage during the growing season to avoid water limitation to plant growth. Transplant success rate was 100% for Lythrum but two of the 16 Typha plants (in separate microcosms) had died by the end of the experiment. In September, plants were harvested and subdivided into above-ground (further divided into leaf, infloresence, main stems and lateral branches for Lythrum) and below-ground components (divided into fine and coarse roots for both species) and their biomass quantified after oven drying (60 8C) to constant weight. Sub-samples of plant material were milled into powder (#20 mesh/ 1mm opening) using a Wiley Mill. The ground material was then digested at 380 8C with a Li-Se- H2SO4/H2O2 mixture (Kjeldahl digestion, Allen, 1989). The digest was then diluted with Nanopure water and analyzed for total N on the Lachat autoanalyzer. N mass for each tissue subcomponent was calculated by multiplying their N concentrations with the respective biomass.
2.6. Data analyses
For field studies, we used a blocked factorial analysis, using transects as blocks, and examined the effect of vegetation type (Lythrum, Typha and mixed), sampling time, and their interaction on sediment and standing water chemistry, and on sediment net N mineralization and nitrification rates. Because of the distribution of Lythrum and Typha in the field, vegetation plots could not be randomly distributed within each block. For the greenhouse study, a 2   2 factorial design was used to compare the growth of Lythrum versus Typha transplants, above-ground versus below-ground biomass and N allocations. Residual plots were examined to check equal variance assump- tions. All analyses were performed on SYSTAT 10.2 software.

xresults
3.1. Nitrogen in standing water and sediment
Standing water was depleted quickly during the summer growing season. Average water depths in early June were 14.0   1.3 cm for the Lythrum plots, 12.1   2.3 cm for the mixed plots and 2.2   1.0 cm for the Typha plots. By mid July, water depths dropped to7.1 1.3cminLythrumplotsand3.5 1.5cmin mixed plots, with no standing water in Typha plots. By early August there was no standing water in any of our study sites.
We analyzed surface water chemistry from June to July 2001 when standing water was readily available in most sample plots. Most of the dissolved inorganic N was NH4+, with NO3  concentrations consistently close to the method detection limit (0.01 mg l 1). The highest NO3-N concentration was found in Typha plots in mid June (0.11   0.05 mg l 1). Concentrations of NH4-N in both the Typha and Lythrum plots fluctuated widely during the sample duration (Fig. 1); in early and mid June NH4+ concentrations were higher in Typha plots than in Lythrum and mixed plots (P = 0.004 and P < 0.001, respectively; one-way ANOVA by sampling date), but by the end of the June, concentrations were higher in Lythrum plots (P = 0.03). Water pH was similar in all plots with little variation between sample dates (6.76   0.03).
In contrast to the fluctuation of NH4+ concentrations in the surface water, soil extractable NH4-N declined steadily in all sampling sites during the growing season (Fig. 2a, Table 1, P < 0.001), but no significant differences were found among the three vegetation types (Lythrum, mixed and Typha; F=0.971, P=0.389). Concentrations of NH4-N in the surface 10cm of sediment of Lythrum plots dropped from 21.3 1.9mgkg 1 in June to 7.4 1.3mgkg 1 in August, and in Typha plots dropped from 14.5   4.7 to 4.1 0.7mgkg 1duringthesametimeperiod(Table1).Concentrations of NH4-N in the 10–20 cm depth interval also dropped (data not shown). Sediment NO3-N was very low in the early growing season when the soil surface was covered by standing water, but increased dramatically in all three sites in August when lowering of the water table exposed sediment to the atmosphere (Fig. 2b, Table 1). Average concentration of NO3-N in Typha plots increased from 0.04 mg kg 1 in June to 9.87 mg kg 1 in August and the difference between Typha plots and Lythrum plots were significant in both July and August (Table 1). Theaverage amount of NO3-N in the Typha sediment in August was more than double that of Lythrum sediment (194.9   31.6 mg N m 2 versus 95.8   20.9 mg N m 2, Fig. 2b, P = 0.01). Soil water content also dropped from June to August in all three types of vegetation plots (F = 36.8, P < 0.001), although soil water content remained very high even in August (Table 1).
Both plant species composition and the lowering of water table affected in situ N transformation processes (Fig. 3). Net N mineralization rates on an areal basis (mg m 2 month 1) were significantly higher in Lythrum plots than in either Typha plots or mixed plots (F = 6.41, P = 0.005), and the factorial analysis of variance also showed a strong time effect linked to the hydrologic conditions (F = 66.4, P < 0.001). In both June and July, net nitrification rates were around zero (or negative indicating net NO3  immobilization), with ammonium production dominating the process of N mineralization. In August, net nitrification rates were 104, 102 and 101% of their respective net N mineralization rates in Lythrum, mixed and Typha plots. Net nitrification rates were significantly higher in Lythrum plots than in Typha and mixed plots (Fig. 3b, P < 0.001).
3.2. Plant growth and the organic matter distribution
For both Lythrum and Typha, plant height peaked in August. In Lythrum plots, average (by plot) shoot heightreached from between 199 and 230 cm in August, which was significantly lower than plant heights in the Typha plots, which ranged from 241 to 273cm (P = 0.002). Mixed plots had an average Lythrum shoot height of 219   9 cm and an average Typha shoot height of 254   6 cm, similar to the pure vegetation plots. The difference between the live above-ground biomass of Typha and Lythrum, however, was not statistically significant (Table 2). On the other hand, a substantial C pool of these wetlands is the dead shoot that remains standing above the sediment surface. Lythrum standing-dead biomass was significantly higher than the standing-dead biomass of Typha (Table 2). While most dead Typha shoots collapse over one winter and form a dense litter layer, Lythrum shoots break down gradually and leave minimal litter coverage on top of the sediment (Zhu personal observation).
However, the majority of organic matter in this wetland ecosystem is not locked in the plant biomass, either live or dead, but in the sediment (Table 2). Organic matter accounted for 81.2% of the top 10 cm sediment and 77.8% of the bottom 10–20 cm sediment (based on the average of three samplings, with no difference between three vegetation types). There was more soil organic matter content (kg m 2) in the 10– 20 cm strata than in 0–10 surface zone, reflecting a much higher density in the deeper sediment (Table 2). Total soil organic matter content (0–20cm) was significantly higher in Lythrum and mixed stands than in Typha stands (Table 2, P < 0.001) and was ten times higher than the organic matter in their respective standing plant biomass.
3.3. Growth and N uptake of Lythrum versus Typha in the greenhouse
Unlike in the field, transplanted Lythrum specimens gained significantly more above-ground shoot bio- mass and below-ground root biomass in the 3-month
greenhouse study than the transplanted Typha speci- mens (Fig. 4). However, N recovered in both above- and below-ground plant biomass was similar between two plant species (above-ground: 789   65 mg N in each Lythrum microcosm versus 793   86 mg N in each Typha microcosm; below-ground: 583   66 mg N per Lythrum microcosm versus 572   76 mg N per Typha microcosm). The above-ground Lythrum biomass contained a substantial amount of stems (in the form of lateral and main stems), which needed only a limited amount of N to build (2.55   0.52 mg N g 1). On the other hand, Typha above-ground biomass was almost 100% leaf material (21.9   0.9 mg N g 1). Lythrum specimens had an extensive root system, equally composed by coarse roots and fine roots, while Typha plants had significantly less root biomass, most of which were rhizomes.
In the greenhouse condition, where water was supplied to keep sediment submerged, Lythrum con- sumed significantly more water than Typha over the course of the growing season. We subtracted the loss of water in the unplanted controls from the planted microcosms and termed the result as plant ‘‘transpira- tion’’ (evapo-transpiration–evaporation). The water that Lythrum transpired (33.9   4.9 l/month/pot) was twice that by Typha plant (17.5   1.9 l/month/pot). In bothplanted microcosms (Lythrum and Typha), water N concentrations were low (<0.2 mg l 1) over the course of the growing stage, likely due to active plant uptake. We calculated the volume of water added (contained 1 mg N l 1 NH4NO3) over the growing period and estimated N uptake by the plants and soil microbial organisms. We found pots containing Lythrum took up significantly more inorganic N from solution than pots containing Typha (185   3 mg N/microcosm versus 135   5 mg N/microcosm, P < 0.001). Nevertheless, this difference (50 mg N/pot) is small compared to plant biomass N recovered in the harvest (1372 mg N per Lythrum microcosm and 1365mg N per Typha microcosm), suggesting the primary N source for both species was the sediment.

xdiscussion
While both Lythrum and Typha are highly compe- titive wetland plants frequently forming monotypic stands in North American freshwater ecosystems, they nevertheless differed quite substantially in terms of organic matter distribution, N transformations, water and nutrient usage, and growth and carbon accumula- tion. In the Montezuma field site, we found that area invaded by Lythrum had significantly higher soil organic mass (kgm 2) while dead Typha litter accumulated on top of the sediment (Table 2). We also found that in situ net N mineralization rates (g m 2 month 1) were significantly higher in Lythrum stand (Fig. 3), which could result in higher N supply for this invasive plant. Soil N availability, measured as in situ net mineralization rates, is the most direct estimate of ecosystem N status, but is seldom quantified in wetland studies (Verhoeven et al., 1990; Bedford et al., 1999). Based largely on tissue N:P stoichiometry, Bedford et al. (1999) concluded that North American marshes are primarily N limited. If so, then the alteration of N transformations (N mineralization and nitrification) following Lythrum invasion could repre- sent an important mechanism by an exotic plant to mediate favorable environmental conditions for its own competitive advantage (Ehrenfeld, 2003).
The interpretation of our field results, however, need to be cautious since we could not randomly assign vegetation plots in our transects (see Section 2). The water table in the Lythrum plots was higher in June whereas in Typha plots surface water fell below the soil surface 1 month earlier. However, the difference in surface water availability does not explain the difference of N transformation we observed since exposure of the soil surface to the atmosphere is likely
to favor N mineralization and nitrification (Fig. 3) and both rates were higher in the Lythrum stand than in the Typha stand. Furthermore, the measurement of soil water content did not reveal any difference between the different vegetation stands (Table 1).
The cause of the difference in N transformation is likely to be the different SOM quantities in each stand (Table 2) since N transformation rates expressed in a mg kg 1 basis were not significantly different (average 25.9 mg m 2 month 1 in the Lythrum stand versus 22.5 mg m 2 month 1 in the Typha stand, P = 0.462). Currently, we do not have direct evidence to explain why higher SOM was accumulated in Lythrum plots, but several possible mechanisms may exist. One possibility is that the higher water table in the Lythrum plots could favor higher plant production but slow litter decomposition. However, we observed peak live biomass in Lythrum plots was indeed lower than in pure Typha plots (Table 2). Additionally, in situ N mineralization was higher in Lythrum plots (Fig. 2), suggesting litter decay was unlikely to be lower. On the other hand, root biomass of Lythrum plants in the field could be 5–10 times higher than Typha plants, with much of it in the form of woody coarse root likely undergoes slow turnover (Zhu, unpublished data).
Another likely cause is the different decay pattern between the two species. Lythrum leaves shed in fall and decompose much faster than Lythrum stems and Typha shoots (Emery and Perry, 1996). The decay of Lythrum stems and Typha shoots also starts with an extended period in the standing-dead position, or the aerial phase (Webster and Benfield, 1986; Ba ̈rlocher and Biddis- combe, 1996). Nitrogen immobilization and fungal growth has been found over the winter in standing-dead above-ground tissues in both Lythrum and Typha (Ba ̈rlocher and Biddiscombe, 1996; Welsch and Yavitt, 2003). While the soft tissue Typha shoot mostly collapses to the ground over one winter, Lythrum’s woody stem, especially the base portion, can last much longer (Fickbohm, personal observation). The base portion of the Lythrum stem also had an initial N concentration of only 50% of the top portion and extended aerial decay could favor N immobilization and fungal colonization (Welsch and Yavitt, 2003). Thus, it is likely that the gradual breakdown of the Lythrum stem allows detritus to enter soil and become part of the organic matter pool whereas the formation of a litter layer in the Typha stand actually reduces the quantity of soil organic matter. The accumulation and slow decay of Typha litter has been reported in other studies (Findlay et al., 1990).Under greenhouse conditions, we found that Lythrum plants produced twice the biomass of the Typha plants with almost the same amount of tissue N mass. Lythrum is able to achieve such high N use efficiency partly because of its highly specialized tissue components. Lythrum’s main and lateral stems, which made up half the above-ground biomass, contained very low N mass, while almost all Typha above-ground biomass was made of N enriched leaf material. Indeed, even though Lythrum and Typha had the same amount of leaf biomass, Typha leaves were twice as enriched in N, which is usually a limiting nutrient in freshwater marsh systems. The extensive fine root system conspicuous in Lythrum plants (but mostly absent in Typha) could be an adaptation of this invasive plant to dealing with nutrient limitation, and enhancing its ability to take nutrients from the sediment.
While we conducted the greenhouse study in part to address concerns of potentially confounding field conditions, the greenhouse study had its own limita- tions. Transplanted Lythrum specimens grew well in the greenhouse. Indeed, mean above-ground biomass per stem was almost twice in the greenhouse (56.5   3.1 g) than we found in the field (31.1   2.5 g). In contrast, mean shoot biomass of Typha plant in the greenhouse (18.3   2.0 g) was just half of the field value (46.7   3.2 g). While all Lythrum specimens reached the full reproductive stage in the greenhouse, trans- planted Typha plants never flowered. In addition, two Typha plants did not grow well after transplantation and died before the harvesting. We suspect that cutting the rhizomatous structure of the Typha plants (Grace and Wetzel, 1982) during transplantation could create strong ‘‘shock’’ while Lythrum’s rootstock structure (Mal et al., 1992), transported intact, was much less affected. If this is true, then various disturbances in the field, especially soil disturbances, should favor the spread of exotic Lythrum at the expense of native Typha.
Our measurements of peak biomass at the Mon- tezuma field site (Table 2) were much higher than those reported by Emery and Perry (1995), but comparable with published above-ground biomass measured in other parts of the country (cited in Emery and Perry, 1995). These authors also reported higher average Typha above-ground live biomass (639.6 g m 2) than Lythrum biomass (444.8 g m 2). The higher plant biomass in our sites may reflect superior growing conditions, i.e. monotypic stands versus sparsely colonized wetlands studied by Emery and Perry (1995). In freshwater wetlands along the Hudson River, Findlay et al. (1990) reported peak above-ground live biomass for a Typha marsh at 1400 g m 2 and
standing-dead shoot at 500 g m 2, numbers much closer to our measurements.
While the competitive advantage of the exotic Lythrum could be enhanced through alteration of certain ecosystem processes, such alterations may not be realized under all conditions. Mal et al. (1997) reported from a 4-year field experiment that Lythrum gained competitiveness against Typha only after the second year, while Typha was more productive in the first year. Twolan-Strutt and Keddy (1996) found above-ground competition intensity between Lythrum and the native Carex crinita increased from an infertile site to a fertile site. Future studies on Lythrum invasion should be conducted under varying environmental conditions (different hydrologic and nutrient availabilities) and attempt to link competitiveness with the mechanisms involved.
In conclusion, we found in the field that Lythrum invaded area had very different organic matter distribution and sediment N mineralization compared to native Typha dominated area, and in the greenhouse, Lythrum plants are able to better utilize the favorable growth conditions. The better resource use or the ability to alter environmental conditions towards its own competitive advantage may be an important mechanism to explain why Lythrum is replacing Typha in wetlands of temperate North American and could have important consequences regarding the ecosystem functions influ- encing species diversity, wildlife habitat, and nutrient storage and retention.
