xabstract
In the northeast US removal of exotic and invasive plant species is a common wetland restoration activity and the invasive common reed (Phragmites australis) is often the target of control efforts. We examined effects of reed removal on sediment nutrient pools and denitrification potential in a tidal freshwater marsh on the Connecticut River. In the first year after herbicide application and cutting of a reed stand, porewater ammonium concentrations in the removal area were about 43 higher relative to extant reed or cattail. Denitrification potentials were 50% lower than in a reference stand of reed. Denitrification activity had ‘‘recovered’’ by the second growing season after reed removal but porewater ammonium continued to accumulate. By the third growing season following reed removal, plant regrowth had occurred over approximately half the experimental plot and porewater ammonium had declined to pre-manipulation levels. Sediment organic content, moisture and porewater phosphate showed no significant response to reed removal over the four-year course of this study. Reed removal allowed regrowth of a more diverse plant community thereby achieving one of the goals of this restoration effort but patterns in ammonium accumulation and denitrification suggest a reduction in the capacity of this site to act as a sink for nitrogen.

xintroduction
Increased coverage by invasive species is widely recognized as a serious problem in wetlands of the northeast United States (Chambers et al. 1999; Galatowitsch et al. 1999). Most research on exotic species effects has dealt with direct consequences for plant species richness (e.g. Ailstock et al. (2001)) with less attention to ‘‘cryptic’’ characteristics such as nutrient cycling or microbial processes. Direct uptake of nutrients by living plants, immobilization on de- caying litter and burial of organic matter all contribute to reductions in inorganic nutrient concentrations in wetland surface waters (Merrill and Cornwell 2000; Templer et al. 1998). Wetland vegetation plays both direct and indirect roles in all these processes so
changes in species relative abundance might be ex- pected to alter nutrient pools. Additionally, nutrient supply may influence the success of invasive plants (Bart and Hartman 2000; Green and Galatowitsch 2000) suggesting two-way interactions between inor- ganic nutrients and plant species composition. In Europe there is concern about reed die-back and research has focussed on potential effects of nutrient availability on reed persistence (Lippert et al. 1999; Picek et al. 2000).
Common reed (Phragmites australis) is a native plant across much of the northeastern United States (Orson et al. 1987) yet it has undergone exponential expansion in areal extent at a number of sites over the last two decades (e.g. Barrett and Niering (1993), Windham and Lathrop (1999), Chambers et al. (1999), Rice et al. (2000)). Plant biodiversity is lower in many Phragmites-dominated wetlands and plant species richness generally increases after reed has been extirpated or controlled (Meyerson et al. 2000). Avian habitat quality, measured as bird species rich- ness is also lower in reed relative to mixed brackish vegetation (Benoit and Askins 1999).
In the northeastern US, efforts to reduce coverage by exotic and invasive plants is a widespread restora- tion activity (e.g. Hellings and Gallagher (1992), Marks et al. (1994)). Re-introduction of tidal waters to impounded wetlands (Sinicrope et al. 1990; Weins- tein et al. 1997), release of native herbivores to control exotic plants (Malecki et al. 1993) and re- structuring sediment elevations to encourage certain plant communities have all been attempted over reasonably large areas. Reed’s invasive behavior cou- pled with lower plant and bird diversity has made reed a target of control at many sites. In some cases, reed control efforts are semi-passive such as restoring connection to saline tidal waters in hopes of favoring a reversion to salt marsh communities (Roman et al. 1984; Barrett and Niering 1993). In cases where re- establishment of tidal exchange with euhaline waters is not appropriate (tidal freshwaters, oligohaline or non-tidal wetlands), control efforts can be quite ag- gressive with herbicide application followed by burn- ing. For instance, Public Service Electric and Gas in New Jersey has applied herbicides and burned about 3000 acres of Phragmites on the Delaware River with the goal of mitigating negative effects of a nearby power plant.
In this paper we report effects of reed-removal on marsh porewater nutrient pools and denitrification activity. We discuss implications of observed changes in nutrient cycling for the ability of reed-removal sites to contribute to improvement in surface water quality and raise the issue of assessing the trade-offs accom- panying this particular management activity.

xmethods
Site description
A mesoscale reed-removal carried out by Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection at a tidal freshwater marsh on the Connecticut River (Chap- man’s Pond (N 41 26 20; W 72 26 30) provided the opportunity to examine effects of reed-removal on porewater nutrient pools. Reed has been present at
four locations within Chapman’s pond for at least 30 years and increased rates of expansion in the past 10–15 years triggered control efforts (unpublished data, Connecticut Chapter, The Nature Conservancy, Middletown, CT). The larger of two stands of reed in the southern portion of this wetland was selected for a combined herbicide (Rodeo) treatment that took place in late autumn of 1995 followed by cutting in spring of 1996. In early September of 1995 (pre-removal) we sampled both reed stands (one selected to remain as a reference, one selected to be removed) and an adja- cent stand of Typha mixed with several other com- mon genera (e.g. Leersia oryzoides, Polygonum spp., Sagittaria latifolia; see Farnsworth and Meyerson (1999) for details of vegetation sampling) to docu- ment plant biomass and porewater nutrient concen- trations. The extant reed and adjoining Typha stands are both used for comparative purposes because Typha is commonly the genus replaced by reed in tidal freshwater wetlands of the northeast USA. We have repeated measurements of porewater nutrients, sediment characteristics and denitrification potential in mid-July (peak plant biomass) of 1996–1998 to follow responses in sediment processes. Study sites are on the marsh plane at similar elevations at least 5 m from a tidal creek. The marsh plane is frequently flooded by high tides.
Our study design is necessarily unreplicated in that one stand of reed was removed and one stand remains as reference so we are forced to rely on the single pre-treatment sampling to draw inferences about treat- ment effects. Estimates of within-stand variability were derived from triplicate plots. Data were analyzed with 2-way ANOVA comparing ‘‘TREATMENTS’’ [Typha, Phragmites-reference, Phragmites-removed] and ‘‘YEARS’’ [1995 through 1998]. Effects of the reed removal treatment will appear as significant TREATMENT and INTERACTION terms since 1995 was a pre-treatment year and significant regrowth had occurred by 1998. Post-hoc differences among spe- cific treatments were assessed using Least-significant Differences. Log-transformation of nutrient and de- nitrification data normalized distributions (Kol- mogorov-Smirnov test for fit to normal distribution) prior to analysis. Our analyses focus on among-treat- ment differences because with a single sampling per year we are obviously unable to consider seasonal or interannual patterns. We recognize that our single samplings to compare treatments may be superim- posed on interannual differences in ‘‘baseline’’ values due to temperature, moisture or other controlling factors Our mid-July sampling was intended to corre- spond to peak biomass and sediment microbial activi- ty thus minimizing phenological differences. All statistical analyses were conducted with Statistica (Statsoft, Inc.)
Biomass and species composition
In September of 1995 before any treatments, we
sampled above and belowground biomass, litter and
sediment organic matter in three ]1 m2 quadrats in each 4
of the three plant stands (Typha, Phragmites-refer-
ence, Phragmites-removed). Living plants were clip-
ped at the sediment surface, dried and weighed, and a
subsample combusted (450 C, 4 hr) to estimate ash
content.Litterwascollectedfromthesame]1m2 4
quadrats, weighed and a subsample combusted to estimate ash-free dry mass (AFDM). Belowground biomass was collected with one 7 cm diameter metal corer to a depth of 15 cm and root material collected on a 2 mm sieve. We made no attempt to separate living from dead roots. AFDM was estimated on a subsample of root material.
Porewater
Equilibrators (Hesslein 1976) were constructed of PVC with two 12 ml sampling cavities (covered with cellulose membrane, Spectr-Por) spaced vertically at 3 cm intervals. Triplicate equilibrators were placed in each vegetation plot in September of 1995 (pre-treat- ment), and mid-July of 1996–1998. In 1998 equilib- rators (and cores for denitrification enzyme activity, see below) were placed in re-vegetated patches in the Phragmites-removed site, one equilibrator in each of two separate patches of reed or cattail within the overall removal site.
Equilibrators were prepared in the laboratory using deoxygenated water in each cavity and set in the vegetation plots for a period of 7 – 10 days to allow for equilibration prior to sampling. Porewater was col- lected and acidified in the field immediately after retrieval of the equilibrators using a syringe and GF / F filter system. Ions (NO3 , PO4 , NH4 ) were measured by ion chromatography and automated wet chemistry (Alpkem Corporation 1986). Along with porewater profiles, we measured total organic matter (loss after combustion for 450 C for 4 hr) and sediment water content [(wet mass – dry mass) / wet mass] in sedi- ment cores collected near the three equilibrator loca- tions in each stand.
Denitrification potential
One sediment core (total depth |15 cm) from each of three plots in a vegetation stand was collected for assays of denitrification potential. Samples were stored at 4 C for a maximum of 24 hr between sampling and analysis. Sediments were homogenized and large roots removed by hand and held at field moisture for all analyses. Denitrification enzyme as- says (triplicate analytical replicates from each core) used the short-term anaerobic assay described by Smith and Tiedje (1979). Sediments were amended with KNO 3 , glucose, chloramphenicol and acetylene, and incubated under anaerobic conditions for 90 minutes. Gas samples were taken at 30 and 90 min- utes, stored in evacuated glass vials and analyzed for N2 O by electron capture gas chromatography.

xresults
Reed removal
The summer after reed herbiciding/cutting (1996) no plants grew in the treated site and a thick (|20 cm) layer of plant litter covered the entire area. By July of 1997, this litter layer had completely disappeared, probably lost to export during winter storms and many small seedlings (Leersia, Sagittaria, Typha, Bidens and Zizania) were apparent at time of sampling (Farnsworth and Meyerson 1999). In July of 1998, patchy regrowth of both Typha and reed together covered approximately 50% of the treatment area.
Biomass
Aboveground biomass at the two reed sites (2068 g AFDM / m2 6 154 (SE)); 1850 6 330 reed reference, reed removal respectively) were indistinguishable in 1995 prior to treatment and well within the range for other tidal freshwater sites in the northeast USA (Meyerson et al. 2000). Reed aboveground biomass was greater than Typha biomass (939 6 266; p 5 0.012, F2,6 5 11.3) as we have observed previously at a comparable site on the Hudson River (Templer et al. 1998). Litter standing stocks were higher (p 5 0.03, F2,6 5 7.1) in reed stands (227 g AFDM/m2 6 13; 181(36; reference and removal respectively) com- pared to cattail (114 6 27). Belowground biomass was much more variable among replicates and we could not discern a difference among stands (grand mean 5 1962 6 270; p 5 0.39). For all variables, excluding the Typha sites from the comparisons did not uncover any statistically significant differences between the pre-removal and reference Phragmites stands.
Sediment organic content varied over a fairly nar- row range (grand mean 5 14.0 6 0.4; range 5 11– 17% of dry mass) but there was only one instance of a significant difference, specifically the extant reed site had higher organic matter than either Typha or the removal site in 1998. Lack of difference among years (ANOVA, F3,9 5 2.8, p 5 0.1) for the reed removal site indicated the plant manipulation had not changed bulk sediment organic content, at least for the three- year post-treatment interval.
Porewater
Samples from the reed-removal site showed effects of plant manipulation on porewater nutrients. Analyses of variance on log-transformed data showed signifi- cant TREATMENT and YEAR effects for both porewater ammonium and porewater phosphate (Table 1). Porewater ammonium profiles from the two reed stands were similar in summer of 1995 prior to any manipulation with relatively low concentrations comparable to those in the nearby Typha (Figure 1A). After removal of the reed, mid-summer porewater ammonium concentrations increased to levels roughly
three-fold higher than either of the vegetated stands (Figure 1B). Integrated porewater ammonium was significantly higher in the reed-removal site in mid- summer of 1997 (Figure 2A) but had declined by summer of 1998 when levels within vegetated patches had returned to pre-treatment values. Nitrate concen- trations were much lower than ammonium (Grand mean 5 0.04 mg NO3 -N / L 6 0.01) and concen- trations were below our detection limit (, 0.02 mg NO 3 -N / L) in 24 of 214 individual porewater samples. At the time of maximum difference in porewater ammonium (1997), porewater nitrate was practically identical in the removal and reference stands of Phragmites (0.044 6 0.005 and 0.043 6 0.02 mg NO3 -N / L respectively).
Porewater phosphate was relatively high (overall average 5 2.6 6 0.7 mg PO4 / L) and the most consistent feature was stability of concentrations in the cattail site (Figure 2B). In the extant reed site, phosphate concentrations were also fairly stable in three of the four years but showed an increase in both concentration and variability in 1998 for unknown reasons (Figure 2B). The greatest variability was observed at the reed removal site with values less than 1 mg / L prior to reed removal followed by substantial increases in 1996 and again in 1997 (Figure 2B). These complex patterns appear as significant TREAT- MENT, YEAR and YEAR X TREATMENT inter- action terms in the two-way ANOVA (Table 1).Denitrification potential
Samples for denitrification potential assays collected from each vegetation stand in 1995 (pre-treatment) all had rates too rapid to measure with our standard
incubation protocol. In this first year we used 25 g wet weight of sediment in each flask and collected gas samples after 30 and 90 minutes. N2O production was non-linear with much greater rates calculated for the first 30 minutes compared to the entire period. These rates over 30 min were 2–3 3 higher than any we have measured subsequently using smaller quantities of sediment (5 g wet mass per flask). Despite our suspicion that the absolute rates are too high, the rates calculated over the entire 90 min period can be used to compare vegetation plots and did not differ signifi- cantly among treatments (p 5 0.55, F2,6 5 0.67) (reed before cutting mean 5 4538 ng N2O/g DM/h) 6 566(SE); reed-reference mean 5 3309 6 800; Cattail mean 5 4928 6 1498) suggesting there was no pre- treatment difference among sites.
In the first year after reed removal, denitrification enzyme activity in the reed-removal site was only half as high as the activity in the reference Phragmites (p 5 0.006, F2,6 5 13.05) (Figure 2C), which was comparable to the Typha site. In 1997 DEA in the reed-removal site was lower than 1996, similar to rates in the Typha site but extremely high within- stand variability in the extant Phragmites stand pre- cluded detection of any statistical differences (p 5 0.61, F 5 0.54). In 1998, DEA in the extant reed and vegetated patches of the reed-removal site were simi- lar to each other but much higher (p 5 0.004, F2,7 5 13.9) than rates in the extant Typha stand

xdiscussion
Reed-removal effects
Cutting and application of Rodeo was quite successful in short-term removal of Phragmites from this site although there had been some reinvasion by summer of 1998. We attribute the observed effects on porewa- ter ammonium and denitrification potential to reed- removal but the single treatment plot precuded a replicated experimental design making it impossible to rule out effects of herbicide on microbial processes. The most striking result of reed removal on sediment nutrient cycling was the accumulation of ammonium in porewater, which persisted for at least two growing seasons. Based on the relative concentration of DIN and DIP in porewaters (molar N:P | 3) and the high plant demand relative to standing stock of N in porewater (e.g. Templer et al. (1998)) we expect N to be the limiting nutrient in marsh sediments. Our results suggest microbial N demand (for assimilation or dissimilatory reduction) cannot compensate for the removal of plant uptake thereby allowing ammonium to accumulate. Maximum ammonium concentrations do not appear until the second year after reed removal perhaps because much of the ammonium derives from root decomposition or because loss of the litter layer after 1996 decreases ammonium immobilization. In a reed-clipping experiment designed to examine clonal translocation, Bart and Hartman (2000) found that clipping established reed led to 3 – 4 fold increases in porewater ammonium. As with our results, this may be a reduction in plant demand or an indirect effect via decay.
Alternatively, there may have been a negative indirect effect of plant removal such as change in root zone oxidation. Phragmites is known to have several characteristics leading to significant transport of oxy- gen to the rhizosphere (Armstrong et al. 1992). If heterotrophic microbial N demand relies on an exter- nal O2 supply, then killing or clipping reed will act to reduce microbial immobilization of porewater am- monium. Moreover, in stands of declining Phragmites in Europe it has been suggested that lack of oxygen supply increases the dissimilatory reduction of NO3 to ammonium rather than to N2 gas (Nijburg and Laan- broek 1997) which might in part account for the higher NH4 observed. Whatever the mechanism, the net result is accumulation of NH 4 , which has im- portant implications for nitrogen cycling and water quality maintenance in marshes. The ammonium ac- cumulation is transient with elevated concentrations in the first and second year following reed removal. Plant regrowth by year three seemed sufficient to once again draw down porewater ammonium. From a practical point of view it is important to know what transient effects might occur and how long they last to avoid premature designation of a project as a failure or instigate hasty corrective action. Unfortunately for the specific case of reed control, re-invasion is a
common problem (Ailstock et al. 2001) so it may be that both the positive and negative effects of this management activity will be transient.
Porewater phosphate did not respond strongly to reed-removal despite the fact that plant sequestration of phosphate in aboveground biomass should be sufficient to turn over the porewater phosphate pool several times during the growing season (c.f. Templer et al. (1998)). It seems likely that porewater PO4 is under the control of both biotic uptake and geochemi- cal redox reactions leading to complex dynamics following disturbance. Chambers (1997) examined differences in porewater chemistry in sites dominated by Phragmites compared to Spartina in brackish marshes of the Housatonic and did not find a clear relationship between phosphate and plant species or vigor. He attributed the lack of pattern to the fact that his porewater sippers sampled macropores that may or may not contain oxidized iron which would adsorb phosphate. Thus, interplay between biotic and chemi- cal control may confound expectations based simply on plant demand for phosphorous.
Rates of DEA in Chapman’s Pond were about half those measured in a well-studied tidal freshwater wetland on the Hudson (Otto et al. 1999) presumably because the Hudson site had a higher sediment or- ganic content (20% of dry mass, Templer et al. (1998)) compared to |14% in Chapman’s Pond. The decline in denitrification potential (at least over the short-term) in the reed-removal site may be a conse- quence of breaking the coupled nitrification-denitrifi- cation cycle (Reddy et al. 1989). If rhizosphere oxida- tion by Phragmites is the major source of oxygen for nitrification, reed removal would cause a decrease in NO 3 availability thereby decreasing denitrification. The decline in DEA took place despite no measurable change in sediment organic content or water content (data not shown), which are usually powerful predic- tors of DEA (Groffman 1994; Groffman et al. 1996). In actuality, one might have predicted that DEA should increase following the flush of carbon from the dead roots in the removal stand and higher overall N availability due to removal of plant uptake. Thus, plant removal may have two effects, firstly removing plant demand allowing accumulation of higher levels of porewater ammonium. Secondly, plant removal may decrease oxygen availability for nitrification or other aerobic processes. The net result is an accumu- lation of ammonium and a reduction in the amount of DIN eventually converted to N2.
The build-up of porewater NH4 could result in a greater release of N from these sediments possibly switching from a sink to a source of N for surrounding waters. Applying a diffusion coefficient of 1025 cm2 / sec(Krom and Berner 1980) to the NH4 gradients for reed-removal and extant stands (16.4 and 1.4 mM/ cm, respectively) we estimate the upward diffusion of NH4 to be more than ten-fold greater in the reed- removal plot compared to the extant reed site (142 vs. 12 mmole / m2 / d). The N release we estimate for the reed-removal site (7 kg / ha / yr) is large relative to other landscape elements, for instance N loss from forested ecosystems is typically 1 – 3 kg N / ha / yr while N leaching from agricultural fields ranges from 30–50 (Gold et al. 1990). If there is downward or lateral advection of porewater in addition to the upward diffusive flux then the nitrogen release from this site will be even greater. Thus, the plant removal may have converted a landscape element from a neutral element or sink to a source of N, which may have undesirable effects on downstream water bodies. Wetlands are commonly viewed as important com- ponents of the landscape that can remove nitrogen from surface waters (e.g. Johnston et al. (1990), Jansson et al. (1998)), and large-scale plant manipula- tions may, at least temporarily, impair this function.
Estimates of whole-ecosystem nitrogen fluxes in- cluding tidal exchange and gaseous N losses would be needed to unequivocally demonstrate that increased ammonium release or decreased in situ denitrification actually led to changes in whole-system nitrogen processing. However, the direction of change in both porewater NH 4 and potential denitrification would lead to greater likelihood of N loss (NH4 diffusion) and less nitrate removal (lower denitrification po- tential) in reed-removal stands. Additionally, loss of the litter layer during winter of 1996 suggests NH4 diffusing from the sediment could not be immobilized (Jordan et al. 1989) making the site more likely to function as a source of inorganic nitrogen to local
surface waters. Growth of benthic algae could help ‘‘cap’’ the sediments but rapid decomposition of algal tissue would lead to rapid release of nitrogen relative to nitrogen tied up in plant litter.
Implications
Our results suggest efforts to control this invasive species can have rapid, biologically significant and, at least short-term, effects on marsh nutrient cycling. The net effect of reed-removal on this site has been a reduction in nutrient sequestration in plant biomass and at least a temporary decrease in nitrogen removal via denitrification. Wetland areas are often managed specifically to allow for nutrient removal from surface waters (e.g. Craft and Richardson (1993)). Declines in these ‘‘water quality maintenance functions’’ would seem to be a consequence of plant removal and the persistence of these effects probably depends on the rate of plant regrowth. On the positive side, removal of reed has resulted in increased plant species richness relative to the low-diversity stand of Phragmites originally occupying the site. Species richness in the reference and pre-removal Phragmites stands was 2– 3 species per 1 m2 plot (Farnsworth and Meyerson 1999). In 1998, the reference reed stand still had a richness of only 3 species per m2 while the re-growth in the cut plot averaged more than 7 species per m2 plot (Farnsworth and Meyerson 1999). Presumably this increase in plant biodiversity will eventually yield greater habitat value for a broad range of species although this has not yet been assessed at this site.
This case study of invasive species management illustrates two major points: 1) vegetation manipula- tion can have large consequences for marsh nutrient cycling, and 2) attempts at restoration are likely to involve trade-offs among the multiple functions operative in tidal wetlands. The fact that trade-offs are perhaps unavoidable in attempts at restoring complex multi-function ecosystems together with an approach for resolving the relative gains and losses should help support information-based invasive species control and wetland management.
