xabstract
We explore the effects of the invasive predatory cladoceran Bythotrephes longimanus on the abundances and seasonal zooplankton consumption by the native predatory invertebrates Leptodora kindtii, Chaoborus spp., and Mysis relicta in inland lakes of Ontario. In lakes with Bythotrephes, the seasonal consumption by all invertebrate predators combined ranged from 2.39 to 13.50 g m22 and was 300% higher than in lakes without the invader. This was due to Bythotrephes because there was no invasion effect on Chaoborus or Mysis consumption, while it actually decreased Leptodora consumption. Leptodora and Chaoborus abundances were lower in invaded lakes, but only Leptodora abundance was negatively correlated with Bythotrephes abundance. There was no effect of Bythotrephes on Mysis abundance. Bythotrephes consume more zooplankton than most other predatory invertebrates, including copepods, and often consume more zooplankton than planktivorous fish. The large increase in predatory invertebrate abundance and consumption due to Bythotrephes means that substantial portions of zooplankton production are probably being diverted from other consumers, such as juvenile and planktivorous fish, and that the role of predatory invertebrates in the pelagia of inland lakes has been intensified by the arrival of Bythotrephes.

xintroduction
Research into the role of pelagic invertebrate predators has been overshadowed by investigations of the role of planktivorous fish in food web models (Carpenter et al. 1985). Trophic cascade theory predicts that changes in piscivorous fish abundance will cascade down the food web and influence the algal biomass of a lake (Carpenter et al. 1985). Bottom-up-top-down (BUTD) theory predicts that top-down forces should be strong at the top of the food web and weaken near the bottom, whereas bottom-up forces should be strong at the bottom of the food web and weaken toward the top. Both trophic cascade and BUTD models predict that herbivorous zooplankton will increase in abundance when planktivorous fish are removed or reduced (Carpenter et al. 1985). However, there may be a corresponding increase in the abundance of invertebrate predators that can reduce herbivorous zooplankton bio- mass, alter species composition (Wissel and Benndorf 1998), and consume a large proportion of the available zooplankton production (Dumitru et al. 2001). Recent studies have demonstrated that invasive invertebrate predators can consume a greater proportion of zooplank- ton biomass than fish predators (Chipps and Bennett 2000; Hoffman et al. 2001). Despite the emerging evidence of the importance of invertebrate predators in lake food webs, their combined effects on zooplankton production have not been examined.
The invasion of Bythotrephes into small inland lakes provides opportunities to explore the role of invertebrate predators in lake food webs and their effects on native invertebrate predators through comparing lakes with and without Bythotrephes. Bythotrephes was introduced to the Great Lakes via ballast water discharge in the 1980s and has since spread to over 90 inland lakes in Ontario (Strecker et al. 2006). Since this invasion, a number of cladoceran zooplankton species have declined dramatically, including Daphnia retrocurva, Chydorus sphaericus, Bos- mina spp., Eubosmina coregoni, and Diaphanosoma birgei (Yan et al. 2001; Barbiero and Tuchman 2004), and overall species richness has been reduced (Yan et al. 2002; Barbiero and Tuchman 2004). Native invertebrate predators in inland lakes include the predatory cladoceran Leptodora kindtii, the glacial relict crustacean, Mysis relicta, and the dipteran larva Chaoborus spp. All these predators can consume significant proportions of the zooplankton production within the summer period (Wissel and Benn- dorf 1998; Dumitru et al. 2001). The introduction of Bythotrephes has been implicated in the decline of Leptodora in the Laurentian Great Lakes (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004). The full extent of the effect of Bytho- trephes on higher trophic levels is unknown; it could increase the total consumption of zooplankton by preda- tory invertebrates, or, alternatively, it could replace native predatory invertebrates without changing overall consump- tion.
Addition of an invertebrate predator may increase competition with fish for herbivorous zooplankton (Leh- man 1991). On the other hand, fish may benefit from the introduction if they are able to feed on the new invertebrate predator efficiently (Sprules 1980) because fish growth generally increases with increased particle size of prey (Kerr 1971). The degree to which Bythotrephes affects fish production and native macroinvertebrate abundances will depend on its vulnerability to fish predators relative to other invertebrate predators, competitive interactions with native invertebrate predators, and its consumption of prey.
In this study, we quantify the seasonal consumption by all invertebrate predators in lakes with and without Bythotrephes to examine whether the addition of Bytho- trephes to food webs increases consumption of zooplankton by invertebrate predators. We also examine whether Bythotrephes lowers the abundance of other native inver- tebrate predators as it does for Leptodora and documented vertical spatial overlap at night between Bythotrephes and native invertebrate predators.

xmethods
Study area and lake characteristics—Eight inland lakes were sampled in the summers of 2003 and 2004. The lakes, located in the districts of Muskoka, Parry Sound, and Haliburton in south-central Ontario, Canada (Fig. 1) are oligotrophic to meso-oligotrophic glacial relict lakes with similar physical and chemical characteristics (Table 1). Water chemistry samples from the epilimnion of the study lakes were taken during the week of 14 July 2003 by Strecker et al. (2006) and Hovius et al. (2006) using an integrated tube sampler (2.5-cm diameter), and water was filtered through an 80-mm mesh to remove large particles. Calcium, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), conductivity, pH, sodium, potassium, nitrogen, and total phosphorus were analyzed following Ontario Ministry of the Environ- ment (1983) protocols (Table 1). Epilimnetic chlorophyll a (Chl a) samples were collected every 2 weeks by Strecker et al. (2006) and Hovius et al. (2006) in 2003 and by the authors in 2004. A known volume of water was filtered through a 0.7-mm glass-fiber filter, and the filtrate was extracted for 24 h in methanol and analyzed with a TD 700 Flurometer (Turner Designs) (Table 1) (Welschmeyer 1994). Lake herring (Coregonus artedii), rainbow smelt (Osmerus mordax), lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis), and yellow perch (Perca flavescens) are the primary
planktivorous fish in the study lakes (S. Taylor, S. Scholten, and D. Flowers pers. comm.) (Table 1).
Zooplankton sampling—Six lakes were sampled each summer with the original design being to sample three invaded and three noninvaded lakes. However, during 2003, Bythotrephes were discovered in two of the ‘‘non- invaded’’ lakes so that we ended up sampling five lakes with Bythotrephes and one lake without Bythotrephes. In 2004, four of the lakes were sampled again, and two new noninvaded lakes were added so that three lakes with Bythotrephes and three without were sampled (Table 1). Invertebrate predators were sampled from multiple stations in each lake subjectively placed within depth contour intervals in each lake so that most depths and areas of a lake were represented. Nine such stations were used per lake in 2003 and 10 in 2004.
Predatory invertebrates were collected every 2 weeks from 09 June to 15 September 2003 and 27 May to 26 August 2004 between dusk and dawn by hauling a large zooplankton net (0.75-m diameter, 5 m long, 285-mm mesh) fitted with a flowmeter (Rigosha & Company) from 5 m above bottom to the surface. In 2003, samples were collected at all nine stations during each sampling period, but in 2004 samples were collected monthly at 10 stations and at a representative subset of five stations on the other sampling dates. In 2004, stratified hauls were taken from the epilimnion, metalimnion, and hypolimnion at the deepest station of each lake with a closing version of the 0.75-m-diameter net. The boundary between the epilimnion and metalimnion was the point at which the temperature gradient was greater than 1uC m21, and that between the metalimnion and hypolimnion was the point at which the gradient became less than 0.5uC m21. These data were used to compute the proportions of the populations of each invertebrate predator inhabiting the three strata in order to measure vertical overlap among species.
All invertebrate predator samples were preserved in 4% sugared formalin. On each sampling date, composite samples were produced by combining into a single sample jar subsamples selected from each station and weighted according to the proportional surface area of the depth contour containing the station. Mysis and Chaoborus were enumerated and measured from monthly samples, while Bythotrephes and Leptodora were counted every 2 weeks because of their higher turnover times. Subsamples were selected from the composite samples until roughly 100 individuals were obtained (or as many as possible if fewer were in the sample) and the organisms counted and measured for length under a microscope. All Mysis were counted per station and separated into three size classes, small (,6 mm), medium (6–10 mm), and large (.10 mm). One hundred individuals were randomly selected according to their relative representation in these size categories and measured. Organism length was corrected for shrinkage (Leptodora 13.7%, Lehman and Caceres 1993; Bytho- trephes 22%, Yan and Pawson 1997; Chaoborus 8%, Bird and Prairie 1986) and converted to mass using published regressions from the literature: Leptodora (Vijverberg et al. 2005), Bythotrephes (Yan and Pawson 1998), Chaoborus (Pawson and McEachern 1987), and Mysis (Johannsson et al. 1994).
Water temperature was recorded continuously through- out the summer using tidbit loggers (StowAway TidbiTsE, Onset Computer Corporation) recording temperature every 15 min and placed 2 m above the substrate, 2 m below the surface, at the thermocline predicted from lake fetch and mean depth (Shuter et al. 1983), and 1.5 m above and below the predicted thermocline. Missing temperatures were interpolated between adjacent dates.
Seasonal production—Seasonal production of the pred- atory invertebrates was calculated using a variety of methods because of differences in predator biology and the types of data collected. We used the egg ratio method to calculate Bythotrephes production following the methods outlined in Borgmann et al. (1984) and using Yurista’s (1992) relationship for temperature effects on egg develop- ment. Biomass production (mg m22) was calculated for each time interval; these were summed to give seasonal production. For comparison we also used size-dependent (Stockwell and Johannsson 1997) or temperature-depen- dent (Shuter and Ing 1997; median data set with cladoceran intercept) daily production:biomass (P:B) models. Daily production (g m22) using P : B predicted from mean organism mass or temperature applied to sample biomass was multiplied by the number of days between sampling dates to give production for each sampling interval, and these were summed to obtain seasonal production.
It was not possible to use the egg ratio method to compute Leptodora production because they do not retain their brood in preserved samples. Instead, we used the Shuter and Ing (1997) model as described previously.
Mysis production was calculated using a modification of the Hynes size frequency method (Johannsson 1995). This method estimates production for each sampling interval by determining the numbers of individuals lost between successive size classes and the biomass that this represents. Growth rates were determined from regressions of the mean individual cohort size (mm) over the sampling period. Two cohorts were identified: adult and young-of-year (YOY). The number of 1-mm size categories into which individuals grew for each sampling period was estimated by multiplying the growth rate (mm d21) by the number of days in the sampling period and dividing this by the width of the size categories (1 mm). Production (g m22) is the sum of the biomass loss from each size class for each sampling period, and these were summed to determine seasonal production.
Seasonal consumption—Seasonal consumption was cal- culated by dividing seasonal production by published growth efficiencies (Bythotrephes 27%, Dumitru et al. 2001; Leptodora 23.4%, Vijverberg et al. 2005; Mysis 15%, Johannsson et al. 1994). Consumption for Mysis was also calculated using a bioenergetics model (Rudstam 1989; Chipps and Bennett 2002). Bioenergetics models use the observed growth between sampling dates to determine the consumption rate given the population growth rate and other metabolic processes. We used parameters and model
equations for Mysis compiled by Rudstam (1989) and modified by Chipps and Bennett (2002) in the Wisconsin Bioenergetics Model (Hewett and Johnson 1992). We used 3720 J g21 wet weight (Lasenby 1971) for the energy density of Mysis and 2380 J g21 wet weight to represent the energy content of copepods and cladocerans (Johanns- son et al. 1994). We adjusted the temperature-dependent proportion of the maximum consumption rate from 0.5 to 0.33 at 0uC (Chipps and Bennett 2000) and increased the temperature maximum from 16 to 20uC because Mysis continue to forage at this temperature (Chipps and Bennett 2000). The bioenergetic simulations give daily consumption in g prey g21 Mysis21.
Mean daily temperatures experienced by Mysis were determined using our temperature logger data and our field observations of nighttime distribution as well as those of Johannsson et al. (1994) and Chipps and Bennett (2000). We assumed they spent 6 h per day in the metalimnion, 16 h in the hypolimnion, and 2 h in transit between the two layers based on temperature logger profiles. Sensitivity of the model to lower experienced metalimnetic temperatures was tested by assuming that Mysis spent 16 h in the hypolimnion and the remaining 6 h at a typical metalim- netic temperature of 6.4uC or the hypolimnetic tempera- ture, whichever was greater.
To reflect sampling error from cohort weight inputs to the bioenergetics estimates of mean consumption rates, we used Monte Carlo simulations to estimate standard errors (Rennie et al. 2005). For adult and YOY cohorts, 1000 pseudovalues of initial and final weights for each time period were generated by randomly selecting values from normal distributions of these weights parameterized from the observed data. Although this estimate of error is an underestimation of error propagated throughout the model, it is consistent with similar estimates for fish (Rennie et al. 2005).
Mean daily consumption rates (g prey g21 Mysis21) were multiplied by the individual weights of Mysis (g) and the number of days in the sampling period to obtain the consumption by each Mysis in the population for the sample period (g prey Mysis21 sampling period21). These values were then summed and weighted by area to give seasonal consumption.
We calculated Chaoborus consumption using procedures and equations in Ramcharan et al. (2001). The approach is based on the relationship
C ~ ðR z GÞ=AE ð1Þ
where C 5 consumption rate (mg d21), R 5 respiration rate (mg d21) based on a power function of animal mass, G 5 growth rate (mg d21), and AE 5 assimilation efficiency (assumed 0.67, which has been used by others for bioenergetic calculations (Ramcharan et al. 2001).
Growth rate (mg d21) was calculated by dividing the mean weight increase of a cohort by the number of days elapsed between sampling times. We were unable to follow the growth of instars because continuous recruitment and emergence make it difficult to follow groups as they grow through the different instars. However, we did track the
growth of two separate size ‘‘cohorts’’ throughout the summer, and these rates were similar to growth rates of Chaoborus spp. in Ranger Lake (Ramcharan et al. 2001). For this reason we also calculated consumption for all Chaoborus using the Ramcharan et al. (2001) growth rates.
Consumption was calculated for each sampling date and multiplied by the number of days between samples. The biomass consumed was weighted by area, and seasonal consumption was obtained by summing these values.
Statistical analysis—To test whether physical and chemical characteristics differed between invaded and noninvaded lakes, t-tests assuming unequal variances were used to contrast the two lake types for each variable (Table 1) (Zar 1996). Sequential Bonferroni adjustments of critical p-values for multiple comparisons were performed. Chl a in invaded and noninvaded lakes was compared with a mixed-model two-way ANOVA with year (2003 and 2004) as a random factor and invasion as a fixed factor (Zar 1996). Noninvaded lakes sampled in 2004 were included in both years in order to evaluate the effect of year on variation in Chl a. Values for 2003 were from Strecker et al. (2006). Data from 2003 and 2004 were combined for all other statistical analyses. Lakes sampled in both years were considered independent; therefore, our sample size for invaded lakes is eight (five in 2003 and three in 2004), and our sample size for noninvaded lakes is four (one in 2003 and three in 2004) (Table 1).
Mean seasonal abundances of native invertebrate predators were compared between invaded and noninvaded lakes with a Mann–Whitney U-test because sample sizes were too small to evaluate parametric assumptions (Zar 1996). Separate Mann–Whitney U-tests were used to test the independent hypotheses of no differences in the abundances of Leptodora, Chaoborus, and Mysis between invaded and noninvaded lakes. The relationships between mean Bythotrephes abundance and mean Leptodora or Chaoborus abundances were evaluated by correlation analysis, as were relationships between mean Chl a concentration and mean Leptodora or Chaoborus abun- dances.
Total seasonal consumption by all invertebrate preda- tors combined was compared between invaded and non- invaded lakes with a Mann–Whitney U-test because sample sizes were too small to evaluate parametric assumptions (Zar 1996). Combined seasonal consumption by native predators only was compared in the same manner. Sequential Bonferroni corrections of critical p-values for multiple comparisons were used because these tests used some of the same data. Separate Mann–Whitney U-tests were used to test the independent hypotheses of no differences in consumption by Leptodora, Chaoborus, and Mysis between invaded and noninvaded lakes.
Differences among methods used to estimate seasonal consumption for Bythotrephes, Mysis, and Chaoborus were assessed using one-way ANOVAs. Data for invaded and noninvaded lakes were combined for this analysis to increase the sample size. When methods yielded signifi- cantly different estimates of consumption, Tukey’s post hoc comparisons were used to determine relationships
among methods. Mean daily Mysis consumption (g prey g21 Mysis21) was compared between invaded and non- invaded lakes with a two-way ANOVA using invasion and sampling date as the factors. Only 2004 data were used in order to remove potential interannual effects and because there were equal numbers of invaded and noninvaded lakes.

xresults
Physical and chemical characteristics did not differ between invaded and noninvaded lakes (Table 1), nor was there a significant difference between Chl a in invaded and noninvaded lakes (Table 1). Higher DOC concentrations in the study lakes than have been previously measured in the same region (mean 5 3.5; Dillon and Molot 2005) most likely reflect current trends of increasing DOC concentra- tions.
Abundance—All native invertebrate predators combined were more abundant in lakes without Bythotrephes (Mann– Whitney U-test, Z 5 22.21, p 5 0.03). Both Leptodora and Chaoborus were more abundant in noninvaded lakes, but there was no difference in Mysis abundance (Fig. 2). Bythotrephes abundance peaked in July and remained high in August (Fig. 3). Leptodora abundance in invaded lakes increased steadily and then declined sharply just after the August Bythotrephes abundance peak, while in noninvaded lakes Leptodora abundance peaked in August (Fig. 3). These patterns of coexistence vary among lakes because in some Leptodora and Bythotrephes were able to coexist at relatively high densities. Chaoborus abundances were lower in invaded lakes but followed the same seasonal pattern in all lakes. Again patterns varied among lakes with Chaoborus being abundant in some lakes despite high Bythotrephes abundances (Fig. 4). Mysis abundance re- mained fairly constant throughout the summer, and there were no differences in seasonal patterns between invaded and noninvaded lakes (Fig. 3).
There was a negative correlation between Bythotrephes and Leptodora abundance (Fig. 4) but not between Bythotrephes and Chaoborus abundance (Fig. 4), although there was a slight positive trend in invaded lakes, suggesting that Bythotrephes and Chaoborus can coexist under certain circumstances. The range of mean Chl a concentration was similar in invaded and noninvaded lakes, and Chl a concentration was not correlated with the abundance of native invertebrate predators (Fig. 4). Although these relationships were not significant, it is important to note that characteristics other than Bythotrephes may influence the distribution patterns of native invertebrate predators.
At night when all samples were collected, Bythotrephes were proportionally most abundant in the epilimnion in all invaded lakes sampled in 2004 (range 71–79%), and abundance in the metalimnion was intermediate (range 14–28%) (Fig. 5a). Leptodora and Chaoborus occurred principally in the epilimnion in invaded lakes but were also abundant in the metalimnion or hypolimnion in some lakes (Fig. 5b,c). In noninvaded lakes most Leptodora and Chaoborus were captured in the epilimnion. Mysis was almost completely limited to the metalimnion and hypo- limnion in all lakes (Fig. 5d).
Consumption—Using the egg ratio method to estimate Bythotrephes consumption, consumption by all inverte- brate predators combined was significantly higher in lakes with Bythotrephes than in lakes without (Fig. 6). This consumption by all invertebrate predators was over 300% higher in invaded than noninvaded lakes because of the energy demands of Bythotrephes. Total consumption ranged from 2.39 to 13.50 g m22 in invaded lakes, of which approximately two-thirds is by Bythotrephes. When consumption by Bythotrephes was removed, there was no difference between native invertebrate predator consump- tion in invaded and noninvaded lakes. Leptodora con- sumption was higher in lakes without Bythotrephes (Fig. 7). There was no statistical difference in Chaoborus or Mysis consumption between lake types (Fig. 7).
Reliability of the estimates—Bythotrephes seasonal con- sumption estimates based on egg ratio methods and P:B models based on temperature (Shuter and Ing 1997) and body size (Stockwell and Johannsson 1997) were signifi- cantly different (Fig. 8) with estimates based on egg ratio being statistically greater than those from size-based P : B but those from temperature-based P : B being statistically equivalent to the other two (Fig. 8). Overall, the temper- ature-based and size-based P : B estimates of consumption were 80% and 20%, respectively, of those based on egg ratio techniques. The original Stockwell and Johannsson (1997) model is derived mainly from data on zooplankton smaller than Bythotrephes, and this may explain the discrepancies for larger-body-sized organisms such as Bythotrephes. In this study the average P : B based on body size was smaller (mean daily P : B 5 0.05) than the P : B based on temperature (mean daily P : B 2003 5 0.21, mean daily P : B 2004 5 0.17).
The similar seasonal consumption estimates for Bytho- trephes from the egg ratio and temperature-based P : B techniques provided support for using the latter to calculate Leptodora seasonal consumption. In this study Leptodora P : B ratios based on temperature (biweekly range 0.088– 0.258) were comparable to those obtained for Lake Tjeukemeer (0.097–0.139) in a study that used a more detailed individual-based model that included birth rate
and instar development to estimate production (Vijverberg et al. 2005) despite Lake Tjeukemeer being shallower (mean depth 1.5 m) and cooler (mean epilimnetic temperture 17– 18uC) than our study lakes.
Overall, the Chaoborus consumption estimates using different growth rates did not differ significantly (Fig. 9). Similarly, altering the mean daily temperature Mysis were exposed to over the summer months in the Mysis bioenergetics model did not result in significantly different estimates of seasonal consumption (Fig. 10). Mean daily consumption did not differ between invaded and non- invaded lakes for adult Mysis nor YOY Mysis in 2004 (Table 2). The sampling period did not have an effect on the rate of consumption, and there was no interaction between the sampling period and invasion status (Table 2). The mean daily consumption rate ranged from 0.088 to 0.211 g g2 1 d2 1 for YOY and from 0.032 to 0.112 g g21 d21 for adults. These values were similar to those obtained by Chipps (1998), which ranged from 0.062 to 0.120 g g21 d21 in laboratory-controlled experiments. Growth rates for Mysis in 2004 were 0.024 mm d21 for adults and 0.040 mm d21 for YOY, which were similar to those in Lake Ontario (Johannsson 1992; adults 0.029 mm d21 and YOY 0.035 mm d21). In 2003, the YOY growth rate was 0.029 mm d21, but adult growth rate could not reliably be estimated; therefore, 2004 rates were used.

xdiscussion
The results of our study indicated that the native invertebrate predators Leptodora and Chaoborus are less abundant in lakes invaded by Bythotrephes than in noninvaded lakes, whereas there is no effect on the abundance of Mysis. Chaoborus and Leptodora overlap with Bythotrephes in the epilimnion, whereas Mysis occupies principally in deeper, colder strata. The summed seasonal consumption of zooplankton by Chaoborus, Leptodora, and Mysis is not affected by invasion of Bythotrephes, although consumption by Leptodora alone is statistically lower in invaded lakes. If Bythotrephes is included, total consumption by all predators is 300% higher in invaded lakes entirely because of Bythotrephes. Given that typical seasonal zooplankton production in similar lakes of this region averages 7.8 g m22 (Strecker and Arnott 2008), our results indicate that consumption by Bythotrephes alone may thus approach or temporarily exceed production of their preferred zooplankton prey, as has been noted by others (Dumitru et al. 2001).
Ours is the first study of which we are aware in which the energy demand of the invertebrate predator guild in lakes with and without Bythotrephes has been studied. Seasonal consumption by Bythotrephes ranged from 0.76 to 13.23 g m22, whereas neither Leptodora nor Chaoborus consumed more than 1 g m22 in any lake of our study lakes. Mysis seasonal consumption was highly variable among lakes, ranging from 0.01 to 3.25 g m22, and was not related to the presence of Bythotrephes. Bythotrephes abundances in invaded lakes were comparable to those of Leptodora and Chaoborus in noninvaded lakes, but Bythotrephes consumption was much higher partially because of their large body mass compared to Leptodora and their lower growth efficiency of 22% (Schulz 2005) compared to 40% (C. Ramcharan unpubl. data) for comparably sized third and fourth Chaoborus instars. Furthermore, the early instars of Chaoborus are smaller than Bythotrephes and do not feed on crustacean zoo- plankton (Fedorenko 1975). Mysis are much less abundant than Bythotrephes and have a slower growth rate partially because of the cooler temperatures they occupy. Both Mysis and Chaoborus migrate to the sediments during the day to avoid fish predation, whereas Bythotrephes can remain in the water column to feed during both day and night (Dumitru et al. 2001) because its long caudal spine reduces vulnerability to fish predation (Barnhisel 1991).
The greatest Bythotrephes effects were on Leptodora, which was less abundant and consumed less zooplankton in invaded than noninvaded lakes. Furthermore, Leptodora declined in late summer in invaded lakes after Bythotrephes populations peaked, while in lakes without Bythotrephes this decline began about a month later. Bythotrephes is the most likely cause of these changes in Leptodora since invaded and noninvaded lakes had comparable physical and chemical features, Chl a concentrations, and fish communities that included yellow perch and at least one cool-water species. The spatial overlap of these species was high, particularly at night, when both occurred primarily in the warmer waters of the epilimnion. They also have very similar diets, preferring cladocerans, but Bythotrephes has a broader prey range (Branstrator 2005) and thus may be better able to switch when common prey items become scarce. Such negative interactions between Bythotrephes and Leptodora have been noted in some other North American lakes (Garton et al. 1990) but are not typical of European lakes (Ketelaars et al. 1995), where they often overlap spatially and temporally. European lakes may generally be more productive than North American lakes and thus have a higher abundance of zooplankton prey (Ketelaars et al. 1993). In fact, Leptodora is often the more abundant of the two species, perhaps because it is less vulnerable to fish predation than the more conspicuous Bythotrephes (Palmer et al. 2001). The predominance of Bythotrephes over Leptodora in North American lakes may be due to lower planktivory in these lakes or to the short time that native fish have been exposed to Bythotrephes as potential prey. This may be an example of the enemy release hypothesis (Keane and Crawley 2002), which proposes that the success of an invader is attributed to its escape from predation pressure and disease in its native range.
Although Chaoborus was less abundant in invaded lakes, its seasonal dynamics were unaffected by Bythotrephes, and there was no overall correlation between the abundances of these species. Chaoborus may not be as strongly affected by the invader because it prefers copepods over the cladocer- ans eaten by Bythotrephes (Pastorok 1980) and remains in sediments during the day. Other factors must be important, however, because both these species are abundant in some invaded lakes. By contrast, Bythotrephes did not affect Mysis abundance at least partly because these species overlap very little with Mysis occurring primarily in the metalimnion and hypolimnion and Bythotrephes primarily in the epilimnion. In addition, Mysis consume a much broader variety of prey (Johannsson et al. 2001). However, there is evidence from studies of fatty acid composition that Mysis had more diverse diets in noninvaded lakes (Nordin et al. 2008), indicating that some Bythotrephes effects may be subtle.
We are confident in our field estimates of the abundances of all invertebrate predators because we sampled at night, when organisms leave the sediments, and because we sampled multiple stations per lake to integrate spatial variations typical of these species. Sampling depths were somewhat constrained by the length of the Bythotrephes net and a desire to sample the pelagic zone to best represent densities of all the invertebrate predators. This could have underestimated the abundances of organisms clumped in shallow nearshore locations or overestimated abundances of those clumped offshore. Given that all lakes were identically sampled and that there were no major differences in the physical characteristics of invaded and noninvaded lakes, sampling biases between invaded and noninvaded lakes are unlikely. Our nighttime estimates of Bythotrephes abun- dance are slightly higher than daytime estimates obtained in some of the same lakes in 2003 and 2004 (Strecker and Arnott 2008), but this is because night sampling typically yields higher Bythotrephes densities (J. Young unpubl. data). We are similarly confident in our estimates of seasonal production and consumption. Error in bioenergetics models and production estimates can propagate throughout the many calculations required to acquire an estimate of seasonal production and consumption (Blukacz et al. 2005), but we varied temperatures to which Mysis were exposed as well as initial body masses to recalculate daily estimates of consumption with little effect. We did, however, note differences among the three methods used to estimate Bythotrephes production and consumption, particularly between the two P : B models. Results indicate that the Shuter and Ing (1997) P : B model can reasonably predict seasonal production for Leptodora and Bythotrephes if egg ratio estimates cannot be calculated.
Our study leads to the question of how typical these effects of Bythotrephes on zooplankton are of other predators and ecosystems. Our observations indicate that Bythotrephes seasonal consumption most typically ranges from 5 to 8 g m22 of zooplankton, which represents 64– 103% of the 7.8 g m22 of seasonal zooplankton production in these lakes. In comparison, Mysis consumed from ,20% to 109% of zooplankton production in Lake Ontario, depending on time of year and water column depth (Johannsson et al. 1994). In shallow, eutrophic Lake Tjeukemeer, Leptodora consumed from 19% to 54% of available annual zooplankton production (Vijverberg et al. 2005), while in central Ontario lakes similar to those we studied, Chaoborus consumed from 8% to 44% of annual zooplankton production, depending on planktivorous fish abundance (Ramcharan et al. 2001). By using data (A. Strecker pers. comm.) on the mean annual biomass of predatory copepods (cyclopoid copepods plus the calanoid copepod Epischura lacustris) in lakes overlapping with ours, in combination with a seasonal P:B temperature model for zooplankton (Shuter and Ing 1997; Table 6, subset 1) and assuming growth efficiency of 0.2, we determined that these copepods consume 4.8 g m22 of zooplankton on a seasonal basis, or 63% of zooplankton production. In Long Lake, Michigan, Hoffman et al. (2001) showed that Bythotrephes consumed 1.5 to 5 times greater mass of Daphnia than did yellow perch during the spring Daphnia decline. Finally, in an experimental manipulation of small- and largemouth bass abundance in two central Ontario lakes, Ramcharan et al. (2001) showed that Chaoborus larvae consumed 9 to 44 times more of the seasonal zooplankton production than did bass in the low fish manipulation, whereas in high-bass lakes, Chaoborus consumed the same or 2.3 times less zooplankton than bass. Taken together, these observations suggest that Bytho- trephes has a greater effect on zooplankton communities than most other predatory invertebrates and that predatory invertebrates generally have greater effects on zooplankton than do planktivorous fish. Invertebrate predators can thus have significant effects on the availability of zooplankton prey for other consumers, such as fish, and can therefore affect the food web when introduced.
In summary, our study indicates that while there are some changes in native predatory invertebrates in associ- ation with the invasion of Bythotrephes into inland lakes of central Ontario, by far the greatest change is a substantial increase in the abundance of predatory invertebrates due entirely to Bythotrephes. The concomitant large increase in seasonal consumption by invertebrate predators thus means that substantial portions of zooplankton production are now being diverted to Bythotrephes growth and reproduction and potentially away from other consumers, principally planktivorous fish. It is not clear why native invertebrates did not historically exploit the zooplankton resources apparently available to the invader, but it may be because they are more susceptible to fish predation than Bythotrephes with their long caudal spine, their consequent ability to remain in the productive epilimnion for fewer hours of the day, and their relatively low reproductive rate compared to Bythotrephes. It is also possible that high Bythotrephes abundances merely reflect the initial dynamics of the invasion process. To date, the consequences of the
Bythotrephes invasion on juvenile and planktivorous fish remain unknown. Some fish can exploit Bythotrephes, but it is not clear whether increases in growth efficiency through consumption of such large prey could compensate for the energy loss associated with Bythotrephes’ higher trophic position. Many of these ideas remain to be tested, but our study demonstrates the potential for the role of predatory invertebrates in the pelagia of inland lakes to be intensified by the arrival of Bythotrephes.
