xabstract


 The Eurasian genotype of common reed Phragmites australis subsp. australis is

rapidly invading freshwater marshes in North America. Several bird species

depend upon particular plant assemblages for feeding and reproduction and

could be adversely affected by the expansion of this invader. The objective of

this study was to evaluate the effect of common reed on the abundance, richness,

diversity and site occupancy of bird assemblages in freshwater marshes

recently invaded by the plant (southern Quebec, Canada). We conducted fixeddistance

point counts for songbirds (passerines and rails) and visual surveys for

waterbirds (ducks, geese and waders) during two nesting seasons (2009 and

2010). There were major structural differences between common reed stands and

marsh vegetation assemblages dominated by other plant species (bulrushes, cattails,

sedges). However, there was a little difference in abundance, richness,

diversity and site occupancy for songbirds. Marsh wren Cistothorus palustris, a

wetland specialist, was the only nesting bird that preferred a native plant

(cattail) over common reed, probably because common reed stands have low

plant diversity and few appropriate nest materials. No major differences were

observed in the abundance of waterbirds between invaded and non-invaded

marshes. For most bird species, the water depth of the marsh had more influence

on the abundance of individuals and on site occupancy than the composition

of the plant assemblage. Common reed stands can therefore be used by

generalist and specialist marsh passerines as feeding and reproduction sites.

However, it is possible that in southern Quebec, the number and extent of

common reed populations have not yet reached a threshold beyond which

adverse effects of the invader on avian species could be significant. This study

adds to a growing body of evidence showing that the relationship between invasive

plants and birds is not straightforward. xintroduction


 Wetlands are strongly disturbed by biological invasions:

though they cover only 6% of the surface of the Earth, they

host 24% of the most invasive species on the planet (Zedler

& Kercher, 2004). Several bird species depend upon specific

marsh plant assemblages for feeding and reproduction

(Weller, 1994; Gjerdrum, Elphick & Rubega, 2005) and can

be adversely affected by the expansion of plant invaders.

They can lose the native vegetation types that are preferably

used as nesting sites or as refuges from predators (Johnson

& Dinsmore, 1986; Lor & Malecki, 2006). They can also lose

invertebrate-rich feeding habitats, such as the interfaces

between vegetation stands and open water areas (Kaminski

& Prince, 1981; Rehm & Baldassarre, 2007), once the areas

without plant cover are occupied by the invaders. Finally,

their mobility can be restricted by the biomass produced by

productive plant invaders. For example, waterfowl foraging

can be hampered by floating or submerged plants forming a

dense and thick carpet near the water surface (Ma et al.,

2010).

As recently highlighted by Schlossberg & King (2010),

research on the effects of invasive plants on avian species

have produced equivocal results. In wetlands, plant species

like smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora and common

water hyacinth Eichhornia crassipes had significant negative

impacts on the abundance of marsh birds (Gan et al., 2009;

Gunaratne, Jayakody & Bambaradeniya, 2009). In contrast,

other invasive species such as purple loosestrife Lythrum

salicaria and waterthyme Hydrilla verticillata apparently

have little effects on birds (Hoyer et al., 2008; Lavoie, 2010).

In North America, marsh birds are increasingly exposed to the exotic subspecies of the common reed Phragmites

australis subsp. australis that is rapidly spreading through

freshwater wetlands (Guo et al., 2013), especially around

the Great Lakes (Wilcox et al., 2003; Trebitz & Taylor,

2007; Tulbure, Johnston & Auger, 2007; Whyte et al., 2008;

Tulbure & Johnston, 2010; Wilcox, 2012) and along the

St. Lawrence River (Hudon, Gagnon & Jean, 2005). Once

established in a marsh, common reed quickly forms large,

homogeneous populations with low plant diversity

(Ailstock, Norman & Bushmann, 2001; Lavoie et al., 2003).

This grass species also accumulates litter at a much higher

rate than that of the majority of native plants, which contributes

to a gradual filling of the marsh bed (Windham &

Lathrop, 1999; Meyerson et al., 2000).

In freshwater marshes, the few studies that examined the

effects of common reed on fishes (Aday, 2007; Kulesza,

Holomuzki & Klarer, 2008; Larochelle, 2011), turtles

(Bolton & Brooks, 2010), amphibians (Meyer, 2003; Perez,

2011) and mammals (Meyer, 2003; McGlynn, 2006)

revealed low to moderate effects on animal populations.

Information on the effect of common reed on birds remains

limited and sometimes contradictory. In the freshwater and

brackishwater marshes of New York, avian diversity was

reduced by common reed: red-winged blackbird Agelaius

phoeniceus, a generalist species, took advantage of the presence

of the invader for perching and roosting, but other

wetland-specialist birds like the least bittern Ixobrychus

exilis, marsh wren Cistothorus palustris and Virginia rail

Rallus limicola had a reduced number of nests in invaded

sites (Wells et al., 2008). In brackishwater marshes of Connecticut,

some wetland-specialist birds (marsh wren, swamp

sparrow Melospiza georgiana) benefited from the presence

of common reed, while other marsh-nesting birds (saltmarsh

sparrow Ammodramus caudacutus, seaside sparrow

Ammodramus maritimus) were less abundant in common

reed stands than in short-grass assemblages of native plants

(Benoit & Askins, 1999). The same phenomenon (a combination

of winners and losers) was also observed in Ontario

(Meyer et al., 2010) and Virginia (Paxton, 2007). To date,

common reed does not apparently have large effects on bird

richness and abundance in freshwater marshes (McGlynn,

2006; Meyer et al., 2010), but to what extent this situation

may be changing with the spread of the invader remains

unknown. For instance, although only 200 ha of riverine

marshes are currently (2010) invaded by common reed along

the St. Lawrence River, climate change and ecohydrological

models predict that the area occupied by the plant could

increase to 17 000 ha in the near future (Tougas-Tellier,

2013). Wetland bird assemblages will likely be affected by

such a large invasion.

The main objective of this study was to evaluate the

effect of common reed invasions on bird assemblages in

freshwater marshes of southern Quebec (Canada), where

the plant is currently rapidly expanding its range (Hudon

et al., 2005; Lelong et al., 2007). We determined whether

the invader already had some impacts on the abundance,

richness, diversity and site occupancy of birds. We targeted

four groups of birds which represent the majority of species

using marshes during the spring/summer [i.e. the

Passeriformes (passerines), Rallidae (rails), Anatidae

(ducks and geese) and Ardeidae (waders)]. We predicted

that the passerines that depend exclusively on marshes for

food and/or reproduction should be more affected by the

invader compared with generalist passerines. We also predicted

that the presence and abundance of ducks, geese,

rails and waders should be negatively affected by common

reed, first because less open water areas are available for

feeding and second because common reed hampers their

mobility. xmethods


 The study area (Fig. 1) was located in southwestern Quebec

where the bulk of common reed populations is found in the

province (Jodoin et al., 2008). Eight freshwater marshes,

five invaded and three not invaded and used as control (or

reference) sites, were selected. These marshes were chosen

partly because they were invaded to various degrees and

partly because they were easily accessible by road and suitable

(six of the eight sites) for the establishment of observation

towers on dikes. All marshes were located within 1 km

of a major river (St. Lawrence River or Ottawa River). The

landscape surrounding the marshes was essentially composed

by agricultural fields. Four of the five invaded

marshes were close to the Beauharnois Canal, three to the

south (BC1, BC2 and BC3) and one to the north (BC4) of

the canal. These artificial marshes (28ñ85 ha each), created

by Duck Unlimited Canada in 1979, had common reed

stands covering 10ñ35% of their surface. Apart from

common reed stands, patches of flowering-rush Butomus

umbellatus (an exotic species) and cattails Typha spp. were

also present. The fifth invaded marsh (BV: 86 ha) surrounded

some of the islands of the Œles-de-Boucherville

National Park near Montreal. This park is currently the

most invaded site by common reed along the St. Lawrence

River, and the reed stands currently cover 48 ha

(Tougas-Tellier, 2013) or about 40% of the sector of the

park that has been studied for birds. Stands of cattails and

reed canary grass Phalaris arundinacea (an exotic species)

were also found. Of the eight marshes sampled, it was the

only one not surrounded by a dike.

The three non-invaded (control) marshes were man-made

impoundments where common reed was absent or confined

to the surrounding dikes. The Digue aux Aigrettes marsh

(60 ha) was located in the Lac Saint-FranÁois National

Wildlife Area and dominated by southern wild rice Zizania

aquatica and a few sedges Carex spp. The marsh of the

Marguerite-díYouville Wildlife Refuge (MY: 30 ha), on

Saint-Bernard Island, was mostly covered with cattails and

arrowheads Sagittaria spp. The third marsh, near Thurso

(TH: 60 ha), was located in the Plaisance National Park and

covered by a highly diversified emergent vegetation including

cattails, sedges and southern wild rice. Between 20 and 60% of the area of these marshes were occupied by open

water areas (no emergent plant) in mid-July. The bird surveys were spread over 2 years (2009 and 2010)

from the beginning of May to the end of July during the

nesting season. Data were collected in the morning from

5:00 to 10:30 am on days with light wind and no rain by the

same observers each year to ensure consistency in the detection

and identification capacities (Boulinier et al., 1998).

Two methods were used, point counts for songbirds

(passerines and rails) and visual counts for waterbirds

(ducks, geese and waders). The sampling season was divided

into five periods of about 15 days, and each marsh was

surveyed once per period to increase chances of bird detection,

except for the MY marsh that was visited only once in

2009 due to time constraints.

For locating point counts, a vegetation map was created

for each marsh using aerial photographs to circumscribe the

main vegetation types, that is (1) common reed stands; (2)

cattail stands; (3) the other types of emergent plants dominated

by various short forb, grass and sedge species and

which were grouped together as ëshort-heightí vegetation

stands. From the vegetation maps, fixed-distance point

count stations with a 50-m radius were placed in each of the

three vegetation types. Using a geographic information

system, each station was positioned =50 m from any other

vegetation types and =250 m from each other to ensure

independence of the data (Bird Studies Canada, 2008;

Meyer et al., 2010). The resulting 36 stations were relocated

in the field using a geographic positioning system. In 2009,

we surveyed 10 stations in common reed stands, six in cattail

stands and 13 in short-height vegetation stands, and in 2010,

15, 8 and 13 stations, respectively. Each of our eight study

marshes had between two and seven point count stations,

though stations located in common reed stands were obviously

restricted to the invaded part of the marshes.

The daily sequence used for visiting the stations at a

specific marsh varied between periods because detection

probability can diminish with increasing time from sunrise

(Lynch, 1995). Listening time at each station was 12

minutes, which is considered as a sufficient amount of time

for birds (Ralph, Droege & Sauer, 1995; Dettmers et al.,

1999). To detect secretive birds, bird calls were broadcasted

(4 minutes) during the listening period. The species selected

for bird calls were the same as those chosen by Meyer et al.

(2010), who conducted a similar study in common reed

stands in Ontario (i.e. common moorhen Gallinula

chloropus, least bittern, pied-billed grebe Podilymbus

podiceps, sora Porzana carolina and Virginia rail). Two

observers were present during the counts. Every bird

detected visually or heard within the station boundaries was

identified to the species level. A range finder was used to

determine if the bird was within the 50-m radius. For flying

birds, only those =100 m above the station and which

appeared to be hunting were considered (Bird Studies

Canada, 2008; Meyer et al., 2010).

Visual counts of birds seen in the marshes were made

chiefly from 5-m high observation towers. The absence of

such structures at BC3 and BV prevented visual counts at

these two sites. To cover marsh areas not visible from the

towers, observers standing on the dikes simultaneously

scanned the marsh and counted the birds. The observers

communicated with each other using walkie-talkies to

ensure that individuals were not counted twice. Visual

counts were made at the same frequency as the point counts.

In 2009, 26 visual counts were made (from May 22 to July 24), whereas in 2010, the sampling effort was increased to 29

visits (from May 5 to July 26). Using landmarks on the

ground and aerial photographs, the total area under observation

from the towers and the dikes was calculated with a

geographic information system to adjust the total number of

counted individuals observed at each marsh by unit of area

(hectare). The vegetation within each point count station was sampled

in July 2010. Five points were sampled per station, one in

the center of the station and four others 20 m from the

center in the four cardinal directions. At each point, a 2-m

rod was laid horizontally on the ground or water surface. A

second rod, 4 m long and 3 cm wide with alternating 20-cm

red and white bands, was placed upright at one end of the

horizontal rod. Each plant species touching the vertical rod

was noted, as well as the height of each contact (in 20-cm

increments); this operation was repeated each 20 cm along

the horizontal rod. Plant species were grouped into the following

categories: (1) common reed; (2) sedges or bulrushes;

(3) other herbaceous plants (almost exclusively cattails, and

hereafter referred as such); (4) other plants (ferns, woody

plants, etc.). The total number of contacts per vegetation

category and for each height class was calculated for the five

sampling points. The average number of contacts per

station was then calculated for point count stations dominated

by common reed, cattails and short-height vegetation.

This method was also used to estimate the percentage of a

station occupied by open water (here, inundated sites with

no emergent vegetation). Finally, at each visit, the water

depth at the center of each station was measured; a zero

value was attributed to a water level below the soil surface. Because point count stations were visited more than once, we

used site occupancy models to determine the occupancy

probability. These models take into consideration the fact

that an undetected individual was not necessarily absent

from the study site and allow a separate estimate of the

probability of occurrence (?) and of detection (p) of a species,

which may vary by site (MacKenzie et al., 2006). Brownheaded

cowbird Molothrus ater, common grackle Quiscalus

quiscula, common starling Sturnus vulgaris and red-winged

blackbird were excluded from the site occupancy analyses as

they were present at almost all the stations. The first bird

assemblage considered for analyses grouped the generalist

passerines (i.e. birds that use marshes during their life cycle

but that do not exclusively depend on it) according to the

Canadian Wildlife Service, Ontario Region (2006). This

group included song sparrow Melospiza melodia (reference

species), American goldfinch Spinus tristi, American yellow

warbler Setophaga aestiva, chipping sparrow Spizella

passerina and willow flycatcher Empidonax traillii. Specialist

passerines ñ birds nesting in marshes ñ formed the second

assemblage. This group included swamp sparrow (reference

species), common yellowthroat (Geothlypis trichas) and

marsh wren. Rails formed a third assemblage and included

Virginia rail (reference species), common moorhen and sora.

For each bird assemblage, we examined the effects of

habitat variables associated with point count stations on the

site occupancy probability. The variables were (1) the vegetation

type, that is, common reed (reference group), cattail

and short-height vegetation; (2) presence of water above the

soil surface; (3) the percentage of the station occupied by

open water; (4) the average water depth. We considered

models where the effect of habitat variables were the same

for all the bird species or varied between the species (i.e. with

species ◊ habitat interaction). We also considered the possibility

that the detection probability might vary between

species. Each model included only one explanatory variable

at a time (vegetation or one of the three variables associated

with water) to avoid collinearity because preliminary

analyses showed significant differences among vegetation

types for water-related variables. Ultimately, 31 models

capable of explaining the variation in site occupancy probabilities

were tested for each bird assemblage. All continuous

variables were centered and reduced to normalize their

distribution.

The site occupancy analyses were run with programme

presence 3.1 (Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, Patuxent,

MD, USA; MacKenzie et al., 2003) for each year separately.

Each time, we tested the adjustment of the most general

occupancy model (single season) with a bootstrapping procedure

(10 000 iterations) to obtain an estimate of c-hat and

correct for overdispersion (MacKenzie et al., 2006). We

ranked each model based on the second-order Akaike information

criterion corrected for overdispersion (QAICc) and

calculated the AICc weights to determine the support for

each model (Burnham & Anderson, 2002). We calculated

the parameter estimates taking into account model selection

uncertainty (model averaging) using the AICcmodavg

package of r software (Mazerolle, 2013; R Development

Core Team, 2013). The effects of explanatory variables were

considered significant when the 95% confidence interval of

the slopes (ﬂ) excluded 0.

Data for bird abundance, richness and diversity were

analysed with mixed linear regression models; we included

individual point counts nested within marshes (point count

data) or individual marshes (visual count data) as a random

effect. The tested variables were as follows: (1) the total

abundance (number of individuals per hectare for the particular

case of visual counts); (2) the abundance of each

species or species assemblage; (3) the richness (total number

of species detected); (4) the Shannon diversity index

(Magurran, 1988). A log (x + 1) transformation was used on

these variables to normalize data distribution, except for

species abundance data obtained from point counts and for

which a generalized mixed model with a Poisson distribution

was used.

For point count surveys, we conducted analyses only on

species with at least 50 observations during a sampling

season. We excluded barn swallows Hirundo rustica and tree

swallows Tachycineta bicolor because their abundance was extremely variable between sampling periods. The five

explanatory variables tested in these models were (1) the

sampling period; (2) the vegetation type, with common reed

still used as the reference group; (3) presence of water above

the soil surface; (4) the percentage of the station occupied by

open water; (5) the average water depth. Again, each model

included only one explanatory variable at a time to avoid

collinearity. Eleven models were ultimately compared.

Finally, two explanatory variables were tested for visual

count surveys (i.e. the sampling period and the presence of

common reed in the marsh) for a total of five models. All

linear models were adjusted with r software (R

Development Core Team, 2013), and model selection and

parameter estimation were executed as for site occupancy

models. xresults There were major structural differences between the three

vegetation types present in point count stations (Fig. 2). The

maximal height reached by common reed stems (4.2 m) was

much higher than that of cattails (2.4 m) and short-height

vegetation (1.2 m). The mean number of contacts per height

class also varied greatly among vegetation types. In

common reed stands, there were few contacts near the soil/

water surface (0ñ20 cm), and they were most numerous

from 20 to 240 cm. In cattail and short-height vegetation

stands, most contacts occurred close to the soil/water

surface (0ñ60 cm). In 2009, 1453 bird individuals (excluding swallows) from 48

species were seen or heard during the 109 visits to point

count stations. In 2010, 1969 individuals from 47 species

were recorded (168 visits). Both years combined, a similar

number of individuals were recorded in the common reed

stands (on average, 12.3 individuals per visit and per

station), in the cattail stands (11.3) and in the short-height

vegetation stands (13.0). More species were seen or heard in

the common reed (43) and short-height vegetation (41)

stands than in the cattail (32) stands.

Among generalist passerines, American yellow warbler

was the most frequently recorded species (107 observations),

followed by song sparrow (52). The average water depth was

the only explanatory variable with a significant effect on site

occupancy by generalists (Supporting Information Appendix

S1). In both years, the site occupancy probability

decreased with water depth (Table 1). For specialist

passerines, marsh wren (256 observations) and marsh

sparrow (211) were the most frequently recorded species.

The percentage of the area of a station occupied by open

water and, to a lesser extent, the average water depth were

the variables with a significant effect on site occupancy, but

this influence varied among species (Supporting Information

Appendix S1). In general, the site occupancy probability

for specialist passerines decreased with a rising area

occupied by open water (2009 and 2010); this was especially

remarkable for common yellowthroat in 2009 (Table 1).

However, the presence of marsh wren increased in stations

with more open water areas. For rails, presence of water was

the only variable with a significant effect on site occupancy

(2010 only) as more rails were observed when the water level

was above the soil surface (Table 1).

The sampling period was the most influential variable on

songbird abundance (according to AICc weights; Supporting

Information Appendix S2); in general, the abundance of

birds decreased through the sampling season in both years

(Fig. 3). Birds were also more abundant in stations with

deep water or with presence of water above the soil surface

(Table 2). However, vegetation type did not have any significant

influence on songbird abundance. Among generalist

passerines, the vegetation type and the sampling period

were the most influential variables on American yellow

warbler and common grackle (Supporting Information Appendix S3). More warblers were observed in common

reed stands than in the other vegetation types, and in stations

with shallow water (Table 2). Common grackle was

less numerous in short-height vegetation stands. Among

specialist passerines, marsh sparrow was one of the rare

species with a rising abundance during the spring/summer in

2009. The percentage of open water areas (both years) and

the water depth (2009) had a negative influence on the

abundance of this species (Table 2). The water depth also

negatively influenced the abundance of the common yellowthroat

(2010). Finally, the abundance of marsh wren

was higher in cattail than in common reed stands (both

years), and in stations with deep water and open water areas

(2010). In both years, the water-related variables were the most

influential variables on the abundance of Virginia rail, the

only rail species with a sufficient number of observations for

analysis (Supporting Information Appendix S3). In 2009,

Virginia rail abundance was lower in stations with more

open water areas, whereas in 2010, a dry year, the abundance

of this species was higher in stations with deep water

and presence of water above the soil surface (Table 2).

The sampling period was the most influential variable for

the richness and diversity of songbirds (Supporting Information

Appendix S2). In 2009, the richness and diversity

decreased during the spring/summer (Fig. 2; Table 2), but

no other variable had a significant influence, with the exception

of vegetation type in 2010, as the diversity of songbirds

was lower in short-height vegetation stands than in the other

vegetation types that year. Twenty-six visual count surveys were conducted in 2009 and

29 in 2010. The waterbirds recorded included 33 species,

mostly ducks and geese (77% of records). The most abundant

species were mallard Anas platyrhynchos and Canada

goose Branta canadensis (especially at the first survey in

2010) for waterfowl and great blue heron Ardea herodias

and great egret Ardea alba for waders. There was no significant

difference in waterbird abundance and richness

between invaded and non-invaded (reference group)

marshes (Fig. 4; Supporting Information Appendix S4). In

2009, invaded marshes had a higher waterbird diversity than

non-invaded marshes (ﬂ = 0.116; se = 0.054). 


xdiscussion
 Overall, we found few differences between common reed

stands and other freshwater marsh vegetation assemblages

for songbird abundance, richness and diversity. Similar

results have been reported in the few studies conducted in

freshwater marshes in New York and Ontario (McGlynn,

2006; Meyer et al., 2010). In our study, presence of water

above the soil surface and water depth generally had more

effects on bird assemblages than vegetation per se.

Generalist songbirds were not affected by common reed

as expected (Wells et al., 2008; Meyer et al., 2010), and one

species, American yellow warbler, was even more abundant

in common reed than in the other vegetation types.

This species nests in shrubs located near open areas,

brooks and ponds and usually select large shrub stands to enhance protection against predators (Knopf & Sedgwick,

1992). In the study area, almost all old fields and

shrublands surrounding the marshes were converted into

corn and soybean fields, especially during the last 30 years

(Domon & Bouchard, 2007). Common reed stands form

one of the few large vegetation assemblages remaining

near water bodies; the warbler likely uses these stands as

alternative nesting sites as their dense, tall and robust vegetation

structure probably provides a suitable support for

nests and a good protection against predators (Meyer

et al., 2010).

Marsh wren was the only marsh-specialist bird species

that was less abundant in common reed stands, especially

compared with cattail stands. Most studies on the effect of

common reed on marsh wren found negative impacts on its

abundance or nesting activity (McGlynn, 2006; Wells et al.,

2008; Meyer et al., 2010; Lazaran, Bocetti & Whyte, 2013),

probably because common reed stands have low plant diversity

and few appropriate nest materials (Verner & Engelsen,

1970; Meyer et al., 2010; Tozer, Nol & Abraham, 2010).

Marsh wren was also the only passerine that preferred the

wettest parts of the marshes. This preference could be associated

either with a better protection from predators

(Leonard & Picman, 1987; Picman, 1988; Jobin & Picman,

1997) or a higher abundance of prey (Tarr, Baber & Babbitt,

2005; Tozer et al., 2010). The vegetation type had no significant effect on Virginia

rail, a species that is not known to be associated with a

specific plant assemblage during the reproduction period

(Johnson & Dinsmore, 1986; Lor & Malecki, 2006). The

abundance of this rail species was reduced in common reed

stands in Connecticut tidal wetlands (Benoit & Askins,

1999), but stands in those brackishwater marshes had

apparently a higher stem density than freshwater ones

(Meyerson et al., 2000), which could represent a physical

obstacle for birds moving on the ground or water surface

like rails. In the freshwater marshes that we studied, the

vegetation near the soil/water surface is not very dense in

common reed stands, and thus, rails should be able to move

through the common reed, unlike what we initially suspected.

A finer analysis of the vegetation structure may thus

be required to fully understand the role of common reed as

a physical barrier for birds. On the other hand, waterrelated

variables were influential on Virginia rail, but their

effect was variable between years: in 2009, a year with water

levels higher than normal in marshes (Larochelle, 2011),

Virginia rail occupied the drier sections of the marshes,

while in 2010, a year with very low water levels, it was

confined to the wettest areas. Therefore, this species does

not apparently use sites that are either too wet or too dry

during the reproduction period (Lor & Malecki, 2006). In

Wales, the abundance of the water rail Rallus aquaticus, a

species that uses common reed beds for breeding, is mostly

associated with the wettest parts of the beds, which probably

reflects lower predation risk and higher food availability

(Jenkins & Ormerod, 2002).

Data from visual counts do not support the hypothesis of

a negative impact of common reed on waterfowl and

waders, at least in marshes with less than 50% of their area

invaded by the plant. This conclusion should nevertheless be

considered with caution since birds were essentially

observed from parts of the marshes without common reed.

In fact, very few ducks and waders were observed inside

common reed stands, probably because (1) they are hardly

penetrable (Benoit & Askins, 1999); (2) they do not provide

high-quality nesting material (Meyer et al., 2010); (3) they

block the view and therefore hamper the detection of prey or

predators (Gilbert et al., 2005; Kessler et al., 2011). Smallsized

wading birds apparently use common reed stands for

reproduction, but there is no evidence that large-sized

waders (e.g. great blue heron or great egret) feed or nest in

these stands (Parsons, 2003; Trocki & Paton, 2006). In

summary, common reed stands do not prevent the use of

non-invaded parts of the marshes by birds but may have a

local effect for some waterbirds by reducing the availability

of feeding and nesting sites.

This study adds to a growing body of evidence (see

Schlossberg & King, 2010; Lavoie, 2010; Tavernia & Reed,

2012; Ma et al., 2013) showing that the relationship between

invasive plants and birds is not straightforward. Common

reed stands are clearly not barren zones devoid of birds as

they are used by generalist and specialist marsh passerines

for feeding and reproduction. In Europe, the probable

origin of the invader (Plut et al., 2011; Meyerson & Cronin,

2013), common reed beds are used as nesting sites by a large

number of bird species, including grebes, passerines, rails

and small-sized waders (Bibby & Lunn, 1982; Tscharntke,

1992; Jenkins & Ormerod, 2002; Poulin, Lefebvre &

Mauchamp, 2002; Gilbert et al., 2005). Common reed

stands could thus potentially represent suitable habitats for

related species in North America, as far as the invader does

not locally reduce food resource for bird species (Poulin

et al., 2002). Preliminary samplings of invertebrates conducted

in the Beauharnois Canal marshes in 2010 (Gagnon

Lupien, 2013) suggest that the total biomass of the invertebrates

of the common reed beds was similar to that of the

other vegetation types, although there were some differences

in species composition; similar results have been reported

for other freshwater wetlands invaded by the common reed

(McGlynn, 2006; Kulesza et al., 2008; Holomuzki & Klarer,

2010). Other food sources for birds, especially for waders,

are apparently not affected by the common reed in southern

Quebec. There is no evidence of a negative effect of common

reed presence on anuran populations at any life stage

(Mazerolle, Perez & Brisson, 2014). The invasion of wetlands

by the common reed does not seem to have a major

effect on the relative abundance, growth and feeding of

young northern pikes Esox lucius, one of the most important

fish species of freshwater marshes (Larochelle, 2011). Consequently,

the common reed is more likely to affect bird

assemblages because of its effect on the vegetation structure

of marshes than because of its effect on food resources.

Overall, the scant amount of data currently available

makes it impossible to determine whether common reed

stands constitute a favorable habitat for bird species in

general, or for some specialists in particular, over the long

term. It is also possible that, along the St. Lawrence River,

the number and extent of common reed populations in

freshwater marshes have not yet reached a threshold beyond

which adverse effects of the invader on birds may be more

significant. Moreover, little is known on the magnitude or

the effects of common reed biomass accumulation in North

American freshwater wetlands, which could strongly disturb

the hydrology by elevating the marsh floor (Rooth,

Stevenson & Cornwell, 2003). Several bird species, and especially

rails, could be affected by such disturbance. Consequently,

conservationists should be cautious and should not

interpret our data as definitive evidence of a weak effect of

the invasive common reed on freshwater marsh birds.