xabstract The effect of saltmarsh cordgrass, Spartina alterniflora (Poales: Poaceae) invasion stage on
Cerithidea cingulata (Caenogastropoda: Potamididae) distribution was studied in 2007 at the eastern tidal Hat of
Lingkun Island, Wenzhou Bay, China. The distribution pattern of C. cingulata was aggregated during each season, as
shown in experiments utilizing Taylor's power regression and Iowaís patchiness regression methods (P < 0.001). Twoway
ANOVA indicated that densities were significantly affected by S. alterniflora invasion stage (P < 0.001), however,
no significant season effect was found (P = 0.090) and on the interaction between the seasons (P = 0.939). The density
distribution during the invasion stage was significantly different in each season as shown in one-way ANOVA.
Pearsonís correlation coefficient analysis of density data indicated that the highest densities occurred in habitats at the
initial invasion stage during summer. The peak in C. cingulata density during spring, autumn and winter occurred in
habitats where invasion was classified as initial, whereas the lowest densities occurred in the stage of invasion
completed during each season. C. cingulata density distribution varied among different habitats, and such variation
indicates the response of the species to environmental change, particularly S. alterniflora invasion. 



xintroduction Gastropods serve an important function in
the habitat and ecosystem of a tidal flat; gastropods
are important foragers in the benthic community and
environment (Anderson and Underwood, 1997).
Predatory snails can consume competitively
dominant species to increase diversity in the
community; such snails create sufficient space for
colonisation by competitively inferior organisms
such as Nucella spp. (Menge et ah, 1994).
Cerithidea cingulata (Gmelin) (Caenogastropoda:
Potamididae) is a gastropod that is distributed
worldwide, particularly along the coasts of the
Western Pacific Ocean, Indian Ocean, and Persian
Gulf (Al-Kandari et al., 2000; Zheng et al., 2007;
Reid et al., 2008). People consume C. cingulata as
food, but this species is also a ìpest snailî
competing food and space with commercially
important molluscs such as Bullacta exarata,
Moerella iridescens, and Tegillarca granosa farmed 


in aquaculture in coastal areas (Bagarinao and
Lantin-Oiaguer., 2000; Zheng et al., 2007). C.
cingulata is also widely distributed in the tidal flats
of Jiangsu, Shanghai, Zhejiang, and Fujian, China.
In recent decades, salt-adapted grasses of the
genus Spartina (cordgrass) have invaded western
Pacific coasts, including those of Japan and China
(Greenberg et al., 2006). Many species of genus
Spartina (cordgrass) are highly invasive (Daehler
and Strong, 1996). Cordgrass is a key ecosystem
engineer in a salt marsh ecosystem (Pennings and
Bertness, 2001; Brusati and Grosholz, 2006), and its
occurrence could significantly change the benthic
community structure (Hedge and Kriwoken, 2000;
Neira et al., 2006). Spartina alterniflora Loisel.
(Poales: Poaceae), commonly known as saltmarsh
cordgrass, is a perennial salt marsh grass that is
native to the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of North
America; this species has extensively invaded the
coasts of the Western Pacific Ocean and has
affected native ecosystems, particularly in China
(Wang et al., 2006; Yuan et al., 2013). In coastal
wetlands, invasive plants are ecosystem engineers
that can change water flow, light, and sediments and
can affect benthic communities (Neira et al., 2007). Ecosystem engineers are species that can create,
maintain, modify, or destroy the habitat of benthos,
thereby strongly influencing community
composition and structure (Jones et al., 1994).
When an invasive plant (an ecosystem engineer)
colonizes a coastal wetland, the community
structure and the entire ecosystem are modified
because nutrient cycling, productivity, hydrology,
particle flux, and habitat availability are altered
(Talley and Levin, 2001; Crooks, 2002).
S. alterniflora may outcompete native plants,
threaten the native ecosystem and coastal
aquaculture, and reduce native species richness
(Neira et al., 2005; Levin et al., 2006). However,
the decline or increase in biodiversity in a wetland
ecosystem because of S. alterniflora invasion is a
highly controversial topic, previous studies have
shown that depending on conditions, invasion can
lead to either a decline or increase in biodiversity
(Wang et al., 2010; Alphin and Posey, 2000). A
literature search has indicated that information is
lacking on gastropod distribution in tidal flat
patches at different stages of S. alterniflora invasion
(Neira et al., 2007). C. cingulata is widely
distributed on the tidal flats of Jiangsu, Shanghai,
Zhejiang, and Fujian, China, a region subject to
ongoing colonisation by S. alterniflora.
In the current study, we hypothesized that the
C. cingulata population showed different
distribution characteristics in the tidal flat at
different S. alterniflora invasion stages, such that
the plant was influencing the distribution of C.
cingulata. 
xmethods


 Our study was conducted at the eastern tidal
flat of Lingkun Island (N 27.95∞, E 120.93∞),
Wenzhou Bay, Zhejiang province, China. This
island is located in the estuary of Oujiang River,
which is characterized by a subtropical climate. The
average salinity of the seawater in the tidal flat is 16
psu, and the tide type is informal semidiurnal with
an average tidal range of 4.5 m (Lu et al., 2005; Ge
et al., 2011). The soft sediment is mainly silt. In
1989, S. alterniflora was deliberately introduced
along the eastern tidal flats of Lingkun Island to
promote sediment deposition (Li et al., 2009) and by
2007 had become the dominant plant in the upper
and high tidal zones. Five habitats were selected based on similar
environmental characteristics (eg., climate and
salinity) (Fig. 1). In the high tidal zone, four kinds
of patches of S. alterniflora at different invasion
stages were categorised based on invasion age of S.
alternifloranamQ\y, (1) no invasion, (2) initial
invasion (invasion age 1-2 years), (3) invasion
underway (invasion age 3-4 years), and (4) invasion
completed (invasion age 5-6 years) (Table 1). A
parallel habitat was selected as a negative control
plot in the middle tidal zone and termed as (0) naked
mud flat.
The site was sampled in February (winter),
May (spring), August (summer), and November
(autumn) of 2007. The habitats were 200-300 m
apart, replicated five times with plots (1 m * 1 m)
randomly sampled within each habitat and at least 2
m apart. A wooden quadrat was used to delimitate
the plots and C. cingulata with a body length of
>0.5 cm collected by hand from within each quadrat.
Each season, 25 plots were sampled sampled with a total of
100 samples collected for analysis. For point pattern processes, indices were
obtained mainly based on counts of individuals per
unit grid (quadrat). The simplest indices were based
on variance (S2) and mean density (x) or on mean
crowding (m) and mean density (x) of population density per quadrat. Taylor's power regression In S2
~ a + b\nx (Taylor, 1961) and Iowa's patchiness
regression m = a + fix (Iwao, 1968) facilitated the
assessment of the level of aggregation by means of
slope b and p. Taylor's law is an empirical law in
ecology that relates the between-sample variance in
density to the overall mean density of a sample of
organisms in a study area. In Taylorís power
regression, the slope values (b) significantly > 1
indicate clumping of the organisms. In Poisson
distributed data b = 1. If the population follows a
lognormal or gamma distribution then b = 2. Iowa's
patchiness regression where a indicates the
tendency to crowding (positive) or repulsion
(negative) and p reflects the distribution of
population on space and is interpreted in the same
manner as b of Taylorís power. Such assessment
indicated uniform [6(P) < 1], random [6(P) = 1], or
aggregated [/i(P) > 1] distributions of the population
(Arnaldo and Torres, 2005; Vinatier et al., 2011).
Two-way ANOVA (general linear model,
GLM) was used to determine the mean differences
in density by distance, season, and interaction
between the seasons; Levene's test was used to
determine equality of variance before using the
GLM, and all the data sets passed this test in the
current study (Ge et al. ,2011).
One-way ANOVA was used to determine the
significance of differences in density measured in
plots in each season, and Student-Newman-Keuls
(SNK) method used if a significant difference
occurred for multiple comparisons. Levene's test
was used to determine equality of variance prior to
the multiple comparison analyses. When a dataset
failed to pass Leveneís test, the data was
transformed using ln(x + 1) (Kendrick and Walker,
1995). The data sets of mean densities in different
habitats were then checked by Pearsonís correlation
coefficients among seasons.
SPSS 16.0 (SPSS Inc.) and Microsoft Office
Excel 2003 (Microsoft Inc.) were used for statistical
analysis. xresults


 Our results indicated that b and P was slightly
greater than 1 totally (P < 0.001), and Iowa's model
fitted the data better than Taylor's power law (Table
II). In Iowa's model, a < 0 indicates the tendency to
repulsion and indicates C. cingulata was aggregated
in each season under the spatial scale of this study.
Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant
effect of plant invasion stage (F4I9 = 14.397, P <
0.001) on the abundance of C. cingulata, but no
significant effect of season (F3 ]9 = 2.235, P = 0.090)
and interaction of season x invasion stage ( P ' 1 2 . 1 9 =
0.447, P = 0. 939) was observed.
C. cingulata showed a clumped distribution
in the habitats with no invasion and with initial
invasion of S. alterniflora in the high tidal zone of
Lingkun Island. Significant difference in the C.
cingulata density across seasons were detected
(SNK test, Fig. 2). The highest density occurred in
habitats at the initial S. alterniflora invasion stage in
spring, autumn, and winter and in the habitat with
no invasion in summer (Fig. 2). Patches with
completed invasion had the lowest density (Fig. 2).
The density in naked mud flat in the middle
tidal zone showed a medium value in each season.
Significantly positive correlations on abundance
distribution occurred in spring vs. winter (P = 0.030),
spring vs. summer (P = 0.028), autumn vs. spring
(P=0.002), and autumn vs. summer (P = 0.018)
according to Pearsonís correlation test for density
distribution among seasons (Table III). The results
showed that the number composition of density
distribution at different habitats varied significantly
in the mentioned comparisons. xdiscussion
 Previous studies have shown that some
gastropod species showed an aggregated spatial
distribution pattern (Ye and Lu, 2001; Ge et al.,
2013). A similar result was observed in the current
research. Significant seasonal differences in C.
cingulata densities were observed; however,
previous research has indicated that density
variation can affect the distribution pattern
(Hanberry et al., 2011), as spatial disposition can be
density dependent (Taylor et al., 1978). However,
the variation in C. cingulata densities observed in
this study did not significantly impact on the
underlying distribution pattern.
The comparisons of spatial distribution across
seasons showed that higher densities of C. cingulata
occurred at the no invasion and initial invasion
patches in each season, whereas the lowest densities
occurred in patches where invasion was completed.
Different invasion statuses can lead to alterations in
litter production, belowground biomass, sediment
organic content, and nutrient cycling (Talley and
Levin, 2001), and such features are associated with
food availability for benthic fauna (Neira et al,
2005). The trophic function of the wetland is also
affected (Levin et al., 2006). The distribution of
bethos could be affected by the invasion stages in
the tidal flat. During the initial invasion, the
environment can offer a large variety of
microhabitats for benthos as a result of the low
density of S. alterniflora, and the environmental
characteristics were suitable for gastropod survival
(Neira et al., 2007). However, changes occur in the
habitat when roots of S. alterniflora harden the
sediment, and stems and leaves develop above
ground after the initial invasion stage; when such
changes occur, the habitat becomes unsuitable for
Bivalvia and Nemertina species (Wang et al., 2010).
Therefore, habitat changes caused by different S. alterniflora invasion stages (Wang et al., 2006)
were a significant influence on C. cingulata spatial
distribution.
Although invasion of S. alterniflora changes
the density of C. cingulata, there was no significant
change of the distribution pattern (aggregated)
among habitat with different invasion stages in each
season (Table II). This phenomenon indicated that
the distribution pattern should be determined by the
biological characters of species. While the densities
changed significantly with the factor of invasion
stage and season (Table III, Fig. 2). C. cingulata
density was lowest during winter (Fig. 2),
temperature stress can be a driving force for the
seasonal variation of distribution, although the
effect of migratory birds on C. cingulata density
during winter should also be considered (Ge et al.,
2011). The western Pacific coast is an important
wintering and migration stopover wetland for some
bird species (Butler et al., 2001); thus, the benthos
and birds can be affected each other because they
are both involved in a complex food web (Mian,
1999). Of particular note is that in winter the
coverage of S. alterniflora was lowest (Table I), the
benthos including C. cingulata suffered higher
predation risk than other seasons (Shepherd and
Lank, 2004). The effect of temporal and spatial
organization on interspecific associations should be
considered when applying to ecosystem
management practices of coastal wetlands.