xabstract


 1. The European catfish, Silurus glanis, was widely introduced in western Europe, and it has now

established self-sustaining populations in numerous large rivers of western France. Using data

collected from surveys conducted by the French National Agency for Water and Aquatic Environment

(Onema) from 1989 to 2010 in more than 500 sites throughout the country (10636 electrofishing

surveys), we investigated the potential impact of the European catfish on fish communities in French

rivers.

2. In the first part of the analysis, we compared trends observed before and after the European catfish

was established at given sites (beforeñafter analysis). Species richness, evenness and diversity

decreased significantly after the European catfish was established at 1.4%, 1.4% and 5.8% of the sites,

respectively. Total fish biomass and density decreased significantly at 6.6% and 2.9% of the sites,

respectively. In the second part of the analysis, we compared sites with European catfish against sites

lacking European catfish during the same period (withñwithout analysis). Fish species richness was

significantly higher in sites with European catfish. No significant differences in fish diversity, evenness,

total fish biomass or density were found between sites with or without European catfish.

3. While our results indicate that the European catfish may in a few cases impact fish communities

or populations, it does not appear to be responsible for a countrywide collapse in fish assemblages.

xintroduction


 Several threats to inland water ecosystems have been

identified, among which invasions are recognised as

serious menaces (Dudgeon et al., 2006). Often resulting

from accidental or intentional translocations of species

by humans, invasions affect a wide range of plant and

animal taxa in many lakes and rivers worldwide

(Garcia-Berthou, 2007; Ricciardi & MacIssac, 2011).

Freshwater fish are among the most introduced animals

worldwide (Copp et al., 2005; Elvira & Almodovar,

2001), mainly because of escapes from aquaculture or

intentional releases for recreational fisheries (Copp, Templeton

& Gozlan, 2007; Welcomme et al., 2010; Cucherousset

& Olden, 2011). Non-native game fish are often

significantly larger than native species and occupy significantly

higher trophic levels (Donaldson et al., 2011).

In freshwater ecosystems subject to strong top-down

control (Shurin et al., 2002), fish introductions may have

important effects (Vander Zanden, Casselman & Rasmussen,

1999) such as changes to prey-size refugia and

thus to predatorñprey equilibria (Chase, 1999; Clavero &

Garcia-Berthou, 2005) or energy fluxes (MacAvoy et al.,

2000).

One of the most popular and successful fish introductions

in Europe has involved the European catfish, Silurus

glanis. Originating in eastern Europe and western

Asia, the species was introduced to France at the end of

 the 19th century and has now established self-sustaining

populations in many French rivers (Copp et al., 2009;

Poulet, Beaulaton & Dembski, 2011). This long-lived

predator may reach a total length of over 2.5 m, becoming

twice as large as the native piscivore, northern pike

(Esox Lucius).

The large number of videos broadcast and articles

published in newspapers and angling magazines, feeding

myths about the size or behaviour of specimens

caught, and even some scientific publications (e.g. Cucherousset

et al., 2012), have resulted in strong views for

or against S. glanis and deep concerns about its foraging

behaviour and impact on freshwater biota. Although

S. glanis has been hypothesised to affect waterbird populations

in Spanish reservoirs (Carol et al., 2009), little is

known about the ecology of the introduced S. glanis and

there is no evidence that it as a voracious predator

(Copp et al., 2009; SyvÄaranta et al., 2010).

Using data collected from 10636 electrofishing surveys

conducted within the last two decades in more than 500

sites throughout France, we aimed to evaluate the potential

impact of S. glanis on riverine fish populations in the

metropolitan area of France. Fish species richness, evenness,

diversity, density and biomass were compared in

different rivers (i) prior to and after S. glanis establishment

(beforeñafter analysis) and (ii) between sites with

and without S. glanis (withñwithout analysis).



xmethods


 The French National Agency for Water and Aquatic

Environments (Onema) has been monitoring freshwater

fish populations in the whole river network of France

for several decades. Sites were sampled during the lowflow

period (from May to October) using standardised

electrofishing procedures appropriate to prevailing river

widths and depths. Streams were sampled by wading

(mostly two-pass removal), while fractional sampling

strategies were used in larger rivers (see Poulet et al.,

2011). Fish were identified to species, counted, weighed

and then released.


 Only surveys performed with the same sampling protocol

at a given site were selected. Density and biomass

were expressed as fish number and biomass per 100 m2.

Species diversity was described using Shannonís diversity

index and evenness using Pielouís evenness index.

Analyses were conducted using R software (R Development

Core Team, 2014). The impact of S. glanis was

defined from the standpoint of a quantifiable negative

effect on the recipient environment (sensu Gozlan, 2008).
 We considered impact as a significant decrease in total

fish richness, native fish richness, diversity, evenness,

biomass or density after S. glanis establishment at a site.

Fish assemblages were so different among sites that it

was impossible to perform a global analysis.

Silurus glanis was considered established at a given

site as soon as one individual was caught (t0). Sites that

were sampled at least once before t0 and after t0 were

selected. Among these, sites with at least four years of

S. glanis presence were used for the analysis (n = 112).

Differences between the descriptive variables in each

site (total species richness, native species richness, diversity,

evenness, biomass and density) recorded before t0

and after t0 were tested using the MannñWhitney test.

When a significant negative difference was identified,

the Spearman correlation and autocorrelation tests (rank

1) with time before t0 were used to detect a general negative

temporal trend experienced prior to t0 and not

attributable to the presence of S. glanis.

The beforeñafter analysis does not allow the assignment

of negative trends observed in the field to S. glanis

(i.e. correlation does not imply causation). We performed

the beforeñafter analysis with a comparison of

sites with and without S. glanis (withñwithout analysis)

to parallel the intervention analysis (IA) and impact versus

references sites (IVRS) analyses of Stewart-Oaten &

Bence (2001). The impact of S. glanis was judged according to whether

sites with S. glanis (W-sites) exhibited significantly lower

total species richness, native species richness, diversity,

evenness, biomass or density than sites where environmental

conditions would allow the presence of S. glanis

but where it has never been recorded (while electrofishing

or angling; Wt-sites).

The W-sites were selected using species distribution

models (set from 236 occurrence and 874 absence sites

throughout France), taking into account elevation, distance

from source, slope, catchment surface, mean temperature

in January and mean temperature in July.

Because of the non-native status of S. glanis, many of

these absences were not environmentally caused. We thus chose an iterative ensemble modelling approach

(Lauzeral, Grenouillet & Brosse, 2012) that combined six

different statistical methods. Two-thirds of the sites were

chosen at random and used to calibrate the models, and

the other third was kept for independent evaluation. The

calibrated model was then projected over France, giving

rise to a potential species distribution. The selection of

the calibration data set was repeated ten times. The ten

resulting distributions were then summed, giving rise to

a map of the level of habitat suitability. Each modelselected

site (n = 521) was submitted to the expertise of

field technicians from Onema. First, the experts were

asked to judge the probability of S. glanis presence in or

near the site. In fact, especially in large rivers, European

catfish is not always detected using electrofishing and

the field technicians were sometimes aware of the presence

of the species (from anecdotal evidence of anglers).

Then, the experts were asked to judge the suitability of

habitat at each site, to refine results from the model

(10í 9 10í resolution). Some model-selected sites had

local habitat features (not previously used in the model)

that were not suitable for S. glanis (e.g. water velocity).

Finally, 47 stations were confidently selected.

The previously selected Wt-sites were compared with

W-sites showing homogenous environmental conditions.

To identify these W-sites, a hierarchical classification

(HC, Wardís method) was performed on the environmental

data set containing both W-sites and Wt-sites.

This hierarchical classification generated four groups. A

redundancy analysis (RDA) showed significant differences

between the groups (99% randomisation test,

ADE4 package for R), although two groups of stations

overlapped, revealing very close environmental conditions.

These two groups, containing 46 of the 47 sites

without S. glanis, were retained for further analysis.

To detect a potential time lag in S. glanis impact, Wtsites

were compared with W-sites colonised for 0ñ

2 years, 3ñ5 years, 6ñ10 years or more than 10 years during

the same period of time (here, the last data recorded

in the database, that is from 2006 to 2010). Significant difference

in fish richness, native fish richness, diversity,

evenness, biomass or density between Wt-sites and Wsites

was identified using the MannñWhitney test.

xresults


 Total fish species richness, native fish richness, evenness

and diversity were potentially affected by S. glanis in

1.4% (1/69), 1.4% (1/69), 1.4% (1/69) and 5.8% (4/69) of

sites, respectively. Total fish biomass was potentially

affected at 6.6% (4/61) of sites, while total biomass of

fish other than S. glanis was potentially affected at 13.1%

(9/61) of sites. The total density of sampled fish was

potentially affected after S. glanis establishment at 2.9%

(3/69) of sites, while total density of fish other than

S. glanis was affected at 5.8% (5/69) of sites.

The biomass of the three fish species most strongly

represented (in terms of biomass) in the data set was

potentially impacted by S. glanis in 3.3% (chub, Squalius

cephalus) and 4.1% (barbel, Barbus barbus) of sites but

with no impact identified for the European eel, Anguilla

anguilla (Table 1).

The densities of the three fish species most strongly

represented (in terms of density) during electrofishing

(roach, Rutilus rutilus; chub and bleak, Alburnus alburnus)

were significantly lower at 13%, 1.4% and 2.9% of sites,

respectively, in relation to S. glanis introduction.

For the top predators, a significant decrease in biomass

was detected in 8.3% (northern pike, Esox lucius)

and 1.8% (Eurasian perch, Perca fluviatilis) of sites and a

significant change in densities was found in 5.5% and

6.2% of sites, respectively. No significant change, however,

was observed in either biomass or density of pikeperch,

Sander lucioperca. Irrespective of time since S. glanis introduction, no difference

was found between W-sites and Wt-sites with

respect to total evenness, diversity, biomass or density.

A significant difference in total species richness was

found between W-sites and Wt-sites (KñW test;

P = 0.0036); most Wt-sites held fewer fish species than

W-sites (mean values: Wt = 14; W[0-2] = 17; W[2-5] = 17;

W[5-10] = 18; W>10 = 19). This difference originates from

significant differences in both native and non-native fish

species richness (K-W test; P = 0.04 and P < 0.001,

respectively).

The withñwithout analysis showed no differences in

biomass of the three most represented species (carp,

European eel and chub), or densities of the three most

numerically represented species (roach, chub and bleak)

or biomass and density of the top-predators (northern

pike, pikeperch and Eurasian perch) (Table 2).

xdiscussion
 Comparisons between sites with and without S. glanis

did not highlight any drastic changes in species richness

during the study period, and no fish species extinction was attributed to S. glanis. On the contrary, sites with

S. glanis had higher mean total, native and non-native

species richness. Sites without catfish are probably less

prone to colonisation because of low local habitat suitability,

physical barriers such as dams or waterfalls, or

lower anthropogenic propagule pressure (Lockwood,

Cassey & Blackburn, 2005), which limit the spread of

S. glanis as well as other species of fish and thus do not

permit a rise in species richness (Daufresne & BoÄet,

2007).

The withñwithout analysis also revealed no significant

differences in fish evenness, biomasses or fish

densities, regardless of time since the invasion began.

Nor was there a time lag between S. glanis establishment

and any change over a period ranging from 0 to

more than 10 years since S. glanis was first caught (i.e.

when old and large individuals were probably not

well represented). Some river basins are considered as

non-equilibrium islands in which species extinctions

(related to historical events) are not fully balanced by

colonisations from neighbouring river basins (Oberdorff,

Hugueny & Guegan, 1997; Reyjol et al., 2007).

Species-unsaturated rivers are more susceptible to

invasion by non-native species because ecological space

is less densely packed and interspecific competition is

less intense (Hutchinson, 1959; Kennedy et al., 2002). In

addition, S. glanis appears to be a scavenging predator,

able to exploit a wide variety of prey sources (Copp

et al., 2009) so that, despite its size, the species does

not occupy the highest trophic position in fish

communities of large rivers in France (SyvÄaranta et al.,

2009). Feeding on a wide spectrum of available prey

alleviates predation pressure on any particular category

or species of prey (except for some specialised

S. glanis individuals; see SyvÄaranta et al., 2009; Cucherousset

et al., 2012).

Few sites have experienced a significant impact of

S. glanis introduction, and this lessens the effect of

S. glanis as one among the numerous variables driving

river ecosystems. Some systems, such as ponds or

streams, are known to be more sensitive to invasion than

large systems (Elton, 2000; Gozlan, 2008), and anthropogenic

alterations may have an additive or synergistic

impact with S. glanis on the host system (Light &

Marchetti, 2006).

Possible impacts on a given species were detected in a

small percentage (usually <5%) of sites in our analysis.

Roach decreased to the greatest extent after S. glanis

establishment. Wysujack & Mehner (2005) reported that

S. glanis (TL ranging from 40 to 100 cm) feeds mostly on

crayfish and roach. Predation by S. glanis on mostly

smaller roach individuals, in comparison with predation

by either northern pike or pikeperch, could explain why

15% of the sites experienced a significant decrease in

roach density. Nevertheless, sites without S. glanis did

not hold significantly more roach than sites with the

invader, and neither roach biomass nor density

decreased with time since S. glanis establishment. Climate

change may affect roach reproduction (Geraudie

et al., 2009), and efforts to enhance water quality made during the study period led to a decrease in pollution

by phosphorus and organic substances (Crouzet, 1999),

while river incision led to an increase in water velocity

(Wyzga, 2001; Kondolf, Piegay & Landon, 2002). These

changes could be responsible for declines in limnophilic

or eurytopic populations such as those of roach or perch

(Jeppesen et al., 2000; Olin et al., 2002; Poulet et al.,

2011).

Silurus glanis might potentially affect predatory species

such as northern pike or pikeperch via predation or

competition for food or habitat. However, densities of

predators are often low (<1 individual 100 m

2), and the

number of sites holding these species is often small; this

may limit the robustness of our analysis for such species.

Predatory fish are also very popular with anglers,

potentially creating a significant pressure on their populations

through harvesting. The population dynamics of

such species are also blurred by numerous stocking episodes,

for which statistics are often absent and where

stocking efficiency may vary widely from year to year

(Arlinghaus et al., 2007; Arlinghaus, Matsumura &

Dieckmann, 2010.

Our study showed no generalised impact of S. glanis

on fish biomass, density or community structure in

French rivers. Nevertheless, S. glanis may have local

effects on fish populations since significant changes in

fish biomass and density after S. glanis establishment

were identified at several sites. Future studies should

determine in greater detail whether S. glanis might

change the structure of the food web in the decades

after its establishment. Additionally, research should

focus on potential effects on migratory species (Mac-

Avoy et al., 2000) whose populations are not monitored

by Onemaís electrofishing survey.