xabstract
Plant species invasions may result from, and cause, changes in the vegetation community and abiotic envi- ronment. It is often hypothesized that nonnative plant invaders suppress the diversity of native species. We examined relationships of vegetation and environmental gradients associated with the nonnative invasive wetland plant Lythrum salicaria L. to determine whether L. salicaria invasion is associated with reduced diversity and abundance of resident plant species in the wetland community. Vegetation and environmental variables were surveyed in 10 wetlands defining a gradient of L. salicaria abundance. In addition, relationships among variables were compared between invaded, Lythrum-dominated and uninvaded, Typha-dominated patches within 6 of the 10 invaded wetlands. Contrary to expecta- tions, ordination results showed that plant diversity was higher in invaded than in uninvaded patches. Lythrum salicaria replaced other plant density and biomass on a one-to-one basis. The ordination results generated an unexpected com- peting set of testable hypotheses regarding whether L. salicaria invades diverse plant communities or enhances plant community diversity.

xintroduction
Invasions of nonnative species are of widespread manage- ment concern because of their detrimental effects on ecosys- tem processes and the economic consequences of invasion (Mack et al. 2000). Disturbance or eutrophication can alter environmental conditions and plant communities, creating cokneditions suitable for plant invasion (D’Antonio 1993; Alpert et al. 2000; Thompson et al. 2001). Subsequently, in- vading nonnative plants may alter ecosystem processes and environmental conditions (Vitousek et al. 1987; D’Antonio and Vitousek 1992; Gordon 1998), resulting in further changes in species composition, associations, and interac- tions. For example, Lythrum salicaria L. (purple loosestrife, Lythraceae) was introduced to North America from Eurasia in the early 1800s (Stuckey 1980) and has since dispersed widely among wetland habitats (Thompson et al. 1987; Galatowitsch et al. 1999). Lythrum salicaria is thought to outcompete other wetland plants, causing decreased species diversity (Thompson et al. 1987) and altered nutrient cycling (Emery and Perry 1995, 1996). However, detection of differ- ences in community composition and preferential associations of invasive species with native, weedy, or other nonnative species requires explicit testing at the species level. The determination of species associations along environmental gradients can be useful for predicting conditions that may promote invasion and thus, for managing invasion (Rose et al. 1998).
Species assemblages are usually defined using aggregate measures such as species richness, density, biomass, and vari- ous derived indices of diversity. Although these variables have been measured in numerous plant communities, species-level changes in community structure associated with invasion of nonnative species are generally underinvestigated (Parker et al. 1999). In addition, univariate analysis of aggregate mea- sures of vegetation results in a loss of information regarding species composition and environmental gradients associated with invasion (Parker et al. 1999).
Use of ordination analysis avoids problems of information loss by combining information about species abundances and environmental gradients in a single analysis. However, we found only a handful of studies that used ordination as a tool to examine associations between invasive and native plants and their environment. Of these, many performed indi- rect gradient analyses where environmental gradients are not measured; relationships between species and environmental factors are then inferred. For example, indirect gradient analy- sis showed that invaded pastures were compositionally distinct from both uncleared and native pastures (Fairfax and Fensham 2000). However, Holmes and Cowling (1997) found no obvi- ous differences in community composition with invasion in fynbos shrubland at two of three sites examined. Direct gradi- ent analysis, on the other hand, allows examination of the correlation of measured environmental characteristics with community composition, providing a basis for the develop- ment of testable hypotheses. Use of this method found that multiple gradients defined by variables such as topography, altitude, soil moisture, soil fertility, grazing regime, and dis- turbance history were important in differentiating sites invaded by nonnative plants from uninvaded sites (e.g., Kitayama and Mueller-Dombois 1995; Rose et al. 1998).
It is generally accepted that invasion of L. salicaria in North America is associated with concomitant declines in plant species diversity and abundance, resulting in vast L. salicaria monocultures. Some experimental evidence sup- ports the idea that L. salicaria is a competitive dominant. For example, L. salicaria had high abundance after 5 years of growth in fertilized soil with low water levels in wetland microcosms (0.26 m2) initially inoculated with seeds of 20 different wetland species (Weiher and Keddy 1995; Weiher et al. 1996). A replacement series experiment performed in the field with L. salicaria and Typha angustifolia L. (narrow-leaved cattail) measured higher ramet production over 4 years for L. salicaria than for T. angustifolia (Mal et al. 1997). Another replacement series experiment in the greenhouse found that the intraspecific effects of L. salicaria density on L. salicaria aboveground biomass were greater than the interspecific effects of Typha latifolia (broad-leaved cattail) density (Weihe and Neely 1997). On the other hand, some experimental evidence does not support the idea that L. salicaria is a competitively dominant plant. Higher densi- ties of L. salicaria planted with lower densities of T. latifolia appeared to have little effect on T. latifolia aboveground biomass (Weihe and Neely 1997). Lolium perenne var. aristatum (Italian ryegrass) was successful in reducing L. salicaria seedling density (Welling and Becker 1993);
Echinochloa frumentacia (Japanese millet) was successful in reducing L. salicaria seedling biomass (Malecki and Rawin- ski 1985); and Phalaris arundinacea prevented L. salicaria from establishing (Rachich and Reader 1999). However, be- cause of spatial or temporal limitations of experiments and the scope of species examined, these results may not accu- rately reflect establishment and subsequent long-term dy- namics in the field.
Recent field surveys (Jean and Bouchard 1993; Treberg and Husband 1999; Keller 2000; Farnsworth and Ellis 2001) have produced evidence contrary to that of experimental re- sults that support the hypothesis that L. salicaria is associ- ated with reduced plant richness and diversity. In two cases, no significant associations were detected between species richness and L. salicaria abundance (Treberg and Husband 1999; Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). However, in two cases, nonsignificant trends toward higher richness were noted at higher L. salicaria densities in invaded wet meadows (Farns- worth and Ellis 2001) and in invaded Typha spp. stands (Keller 2000). In once case, invaded Typha spp. stands were more diverse and were found to have higher water levels than uninvaded T. angustifolia stands (Jean and Bouchard 1993). In addition, plant diversity did not differ between plots of high and low L. salicaria density (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). No plant species were consistently absent from plots containing L. salicaria on a single-species, presence– absence basis (Treberg and Husband 1999) or on the basis of species ranked importance (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). De- creasing biomass of other wetland plants was associated with increasing L. salicaria biomass (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001), as might be expected. The relationships between L. salicaria and other vegetation differed depending on which univariate measures were examined (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). There- fore, a multivariate approach could be useful in determining what combination of community measures is most important for determining differences in wetland communities invaded by L. salicaria.
We examined wetland characteristics associated with inva- sion of L. salicaria using ordination analysis. Our objective was to address the hypothesis that the recent pronounced invasion of temperate North American wetlands by the Eur- asian invader, L. salicaria, is associated with decreased abun- dances of resident species, including both native species and older nonnative colonists. Our goal was to examine invader– environment relationships that cannot be used to infer causal relationships, but rather allow the development of testable hy- potheses to explain observed patterns. First, we examined the relationship between L. salicaria abundance and environmen- tal characteristics. We performed reciprocal ordinations to ob- tain an idea of the strength of relationships between L. salicaria and environmental variables. Second, we exam- ined species associations along environmental gradients in invaded and uninvaded patches within wetlands contain- ing L. salicaria to determine species composition and envi- ronmental gradients associated with L. salicaria invasion.

xmethods
Study site and sampling regime
We surveyed 10 wetlands dominated by T. angustifolia that had been recently invaded by L. salicaria in Hennepin and Carver counties, southeastern Minnesota, USA. These two counties had numerous L. salicaria populations by 1987, and the species had invaded over 15 000 known ha in Minnesota by 1994 (Skinner et al. 1994). Recent records from the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources Purple Loosestrife Eradication Program (established in 1987) indi- cated that some of the wetlands we surveyed had been invaded since before 1988; however, some sites had no ex- isting records. The presence of dead standing L. salicaria stems indicated that it had grown in the patches sampled for at least 2 years prior to the survey. The wetlands surveyed were located within a 6.5-km radius and sampling was com- pleted between 22 July and 5 August 1999, when growth of most plant species was complete and before senescence of species such as Carex and various forbs.
Invaded vegetation containing L. salicaria was surveyed in all 10 wetlands to examine the strength of the relation- ships between L. salicaria variables and abiotic and biotic environmental variables. In each wetland, vegetation was sampled using a stratified random sampling design. The de- sign consisted of six (2 m × 0.5 m) sampling plots arranged in a grid of two plots by three plots, spaced 1 m apart. The first plot was randomly placed in the invaded vegetation at least 1 m interior to the patch edge, and thereafter the grid was two plots wide and extended three plots into the wet- land. The long edge of each sampling plot was parallel with the edge of the wetland.
Within each sampling plot, we recorded water level, stem density, stem height, and species identity of each individual (nomenclature follows Gleason and Cronquist 1963). Two 0.1 m × 0.5 m strips of aboveground standing crop were cut and sorted into live L. salicaria, live standing crop of other species, and total dead standing matter. Plant material was returned to the laboratory, dried to constant mass at 80 °C, and weighed. Species densities of plants not including L. salicaria were used to calculate the Shannon-Wiener in- dex of diversity for each sample. A 10 cm deep × 5 cm diameter soil core was taken from the centre of each sam- pling plot. Each soil core was homogenized and frozen for later analysis of organic matter content, determined by ashing samples at 500 °C for 2 h.
In addition, we surveyed uninvaded, T. angustifolia-domi- nated vegetation in a subset of six of the invaded wetlands. These patches had no prior evidence of L. salicaria invasion, indicated by a lack of visible L. salicaria seedlings, adults, and dead stems. Sampling was carried out in the same man- ner as in L. salicaria patches. This allowed us to compare species assemblages in invaded and uninvaded patches of vegetation in these wetlands.
Statistical analyses
Lythrum salicaria – environment relationships
Ordinations (CANOCO 4.02, ter Braak and Smilauer 1997) were used to examine relationships between a set of L. salicaria characteristics and measured environmental characteristics in all 10 invaded sites. L. salicaria variables consisted of three measures of abundance: stem density, av- erage stem height, and live aboveground biomass. The envi- ronmental data set consisted of five biotic and two abiotic variables: (i) stem density, average stem height, species rich- ness, live aboveground biomass, and Shannon-Wiener index
of diversity (for all species other than L. salicaria) and (ii) water level and percent soil organic matter.
Principal components analysis (PCA) and redundancy analysis (RDA) were performed for both the L. salicaria and the environmental variables. A preliminary correspondence analysis (CA) determined that these analyses were appropri- ate because the gradient generated by the data was short enough to be linear (gradient <1.5 SD, ter Braak and Prentice 1988). PCA extracts orthogonal gradients (the axes) that explain the largest amount of variation in the independ- ent variables, without consideration of measured environ- mental variables. RDA determines linear combinations of environmental variables (axes) that best explain the patterns of variation in the dependent variables. Comparison of the site scores of PCA and RDA determines whether the envi- ronmental factors measured (RDA) correspond with the gra- dients observed in the data (PCA).
Lythrum salicaria invasion may be promoted in wetlands with certain initial conditions, but L. salicaria may also alter the surrounding vegetation and environment after invasion. Therefore, because the variables causing current wetland conditions are unknown, two reciprocal RDAs were per- formed using either L. salicaria as dependent and environ- ment as explanatory variables or environment as dependent and L. salicaria as explanatory variables (ter Braak 1987, p. 136). This allowed us to examine which combination of L. salicaria and environmental variables resulted in the most explanatory relationship between L. salicaria and its envi- ronment.
Water level and density of other plant variables were log10 transformed and live aboveground biomass, live L. salicaria biomass, and richness were square-root transformed to im- prove normality. Dependent variables were centred and stan- dardized with a mean of zero and unit variance because they consisted of different types of measures (e.g., mass, counts). For RDAs, explanatory variables were first screened individ- ually using partial ordinations to remove nonsignificant and redundant variables from the model (ter Braak 1987). A split-plot design accounted for spatial dependence contrib- uted by multiple samples from independent sites. Signifi- cance of each explanatory variable and the final model were determined using 199 Monte Carlo permutations within whole plots defined by a covariable for wetland site (ter Braak and Smilauer 1998).
Comparison of invaded and uninvaded patches; community composition
We used ordination to examine species composition and environmental conditions between invaded and uninvaded patches in six wetlands containing L. salicaria (CANOCO 4.02, ter Braak and Smilauer 1997). The environmental variables included were: species richness, average stem height, stem density, live standing biomass, total dead standing biomass, diversity, water level, percent soil or- ganic matter, and an additional binomial variable indicating stand type (invaded or uninvaded). Variables included data for all species, including L. salicaria. Environmental vari- ables were not transformed prior to analysis because canon- ical correspondence analysis is not dependent on parametric distributional assumptions (Palmer 1993). Spe- cies found in fewer than three samples were excluded from the analysis to prevent distortion of the variance (ter Braak and Smilauer 1998).
Correspondence analysis (CA) was performed for the spe- cies density data for comparison with canonical correspon- dence analysis (CCA). CA is a unimodal technique that sequentially extracts the largest orthogonal gradients (axes) that separate species along the strongest gradient regardless of whether that gradient was actually measured (Palmer 1993). Preliminary CA determined that a unimodal model was appropriate in this case because of the increased vari- ance associated with the inclusion of species-specific re- sponses (species densities; gradient >1.5 SD; ter Braak and Prentice 1988). CCA was used to examine the relationship between species densities and measured environmental vari- ables. It determines linear combinations of the explanatory variables (axes) that best explain the patterns of variation in the species data. Measured environmental variables that co- incide with the ordination axes are important in determining species associations. Comparison of the results of these two analyses determined how well the measured environmental factors (CCA) corresponded with the gradients extracted from the species data (CA). In a CCA biplot, correlation of species with environmental factors can be determined by drawing perpendicular lines from the species to each envi- ronmental variable represented by an arrow. Those species closer to the direction pointed to by the arrow and its dis- tance from the origin are positively correlated with the envi- ronmental gradient; those closer to the opposite direction of the arrow on the opposite side of the origin are negatively correlated with the environmental gradient (ter Braak 1987).
A split-plot design accounted for spatial dependence con- tributed by multiple samples from independent sites. Species density data were log10(x + 1) transformed and rare species were downweighted in proportion to their frequencies (ter Braak and Smilauer 1998). For CCA, environmental vari- ables were first screened individually using partial ordina- tions to remove nonsignificant and redundant variables from the model (ter Braak 1987). Significance of each environ- mental variable and the final model were determined using 199 Monte Carlo permutations within whole plots defined by a covariable for wetland site (ter Braak and Smilauer 1998).
For these six wetlands, we also used univariate split-plot analysis of variance (Steel and Torrie 1980) to compare dif- ferences between invaded and uninvaded patches for the same eight environmental variables above (species richness, average stem height, stem density, live standing biomass, to- tal dead standing biomass, diversity, water level, and percent soil organic matter). The split-plot model was used to ac- count for the spatial dependence of samples among stand types (i.e., samples could only be taken randomly within stand types but not among stand types). The model included six sites (blocks) containing two stand-type “treatments” (in- vaded and uninvaded) as the whole plots. Split-plot units were the six samples within each stand type. No treatments were applied to the split plots; therefore, no stand × sample interaction was tested because of the lack of biological meaning of such an interaction. Species richness was square- root transformed and density, live standing biomass, and wa- ter level were log10 transformed to improve normality and equality of variances.

xresults
Lythrum salicaria – environment relationships
A total of 46 species were recorded from the 60 plots sur- veyed in the invaded wetlands. No plots were monospecific for L. salicaria, and plots contained a range of L. salicaria biomass and density (Table 1). The marshes we surveyed contained fewer species than the river shoreline (Treberg and Husband 1999) and wet meadows (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001) previously surveyed for L. salicaria – environment re- lationships. However, the density and biomass of L. salicaria and the biomass of other plant species were greater in the marshes surveyed here than in the wet meadows surveyed by
Farnsworth and Ellis (2001).
The first two PCA axes for the three L. salicaria variables
accounted for 90% of the variation in the data (Fig. 1A). The first axis represented a gradient of L. salicaria abundance and the second axis was a gradient of increasingly dense but shorter L. salicaria.
The first two RDA axes using environmental variables as explanatory variables accounted for 25% of the variation in L. salicaria variables (Fig. 1B). The first axis accounted for 17% of the variation in L. salicaria data (p = 0.005) and represented a gradient of decreasing vegetation density. Lythrum salicaria biomass and average height were nega- tively correlated with vegetation density. There was only a weak negative correlation of L. salicaria biomass with vege- tation density. The second axis accounted for 8% of the vari- ation in L. salicaria data and represented a gradient of decreasing vegetation height. Lythrum salicaria density was negatively correlated with the average height of other vege- tation. Lythrum salicaria live biomass and vegetation live biomass showed a weak negative correlation. Diversity, spe- cies richness, percent organic matter, and water level were not significant explanatory variables of L. salicaria abun- dance. Site scores of PCA and RDA were highly correlated along the first ordination axis (r = 0.97, p < 0.0001, n = 55). Comparison of the unconstrained eigenvalues from PCA (0.994) with constrained eigenvalues from and RDA (0.253) determined that RDA explained 26% of the variation that was extracted from the data by PCA.
The first two PCA axes for the seven environmental vari- ables accounted for 61% of the variation in the data (Fig. 1C). The first axis represented a gradient of increas- ingly tall but sparse vegetation and the second axis a gradi- ent of aboveground production.
The first two RDA axes using L. salicaria variables as ex- planatory variables accounted for only 11% of the variation in environmental variables (Fig. 1D). The first axis ac- counted for 8% of the variation in environmental variables (p = 0.01) and represented a gradient of increasing L. salicaria density. Water level, organic matter, and aver- age height and biomass of other vegetation were negatively correlated with L. salicaria density, while diversity and spe- cies richness were positively correlated with L. salicaria density. The second axis accounted for 3% of the variation in the vegetation–environment data and represented a gradi- ent of L. salicaria biomass. Both biomass and density of other vegetation were negatively correlated with L. salicaria biomass. Lythrum salicaria average height was not a signifi- cant explanatory variable of the environmental data. Site scores of PCA and RDA were correlated along the first ordi- nation axis (r = –0.95, p < 0.0001, n = 60). Comparison of the unconstrained eigenvalues from PCA (0.985) with the constrained eigenvalues from RDA (0.106) determined that RDA explained 11% of the variation that was extracted from the data by PCA.
In summary, when environmental variables were explana- tory, RDA (Fig. 1B) explained 25% of the variation in the data. In comparison, with L. salicaria measurements as ex-
planatory variables, RDA (Fig. 1D) explained 11% of varia- tion. Important vegetation associations were found between L. salicaria (density and biomass) and other vegetation (den- sity, biomass, and height).
Comparison of invaded and uninvaded patches; community composition
A total of 20 species were recorded from three or more of the 72 plots surveyed in the invaded and uninvaded patches. No plants considered to be noxious weeds (Minnesota De- partment of Agriculture and Department of Natural Re- sources 1999 Rules) were present in any plots. One nonnative species, Solanum dulcamara L., and one species of possible North American or European genotypic origin, Phalaris arundinacea L. (Galatowitsch et al. 1999), were present in addition to L. salicaria in the plots surveyed. Al- though P. arundinacea is considered invasive in some wet- lands, it was not a major component of the wetlands we surveyed. Plots contained a range of plant biomass and den- sity (Table 2). The first two CA axes accounted for 33% of the variation in the species data (Fig. 2A). Polygonum amphibium L., Carex lacustris Willd., and Lysimachia thrysiflora L. were associated with T. angustifolia; Sagittaria latifolia Willd., and Cicuta bulbifera L. were associated with L. salicaria. Nonnative Solanum dulcamara was more closely associated with T. angustifolia, whereas Phalaris arundinacea was as- sociated with L. salicaria.
The first two CCA axes accounted for 21% of the varia- tion in the species data (Fig. 2B). The significant environ- mental variables were plant height, density, diversity, species richness, percent organic matter, and site invasion status. Live aboveground biomass, dead aboveground biomass, and water level were not significant in predicting species densi- ties. The first CCA axis accounted for 13% of the variation in species densities (p = 0.005) and represented a diversity gradient. Lythrum salicaria, Cicuta bulbifera, Sagittaria latifolia, Calamagrostis canadensis (Michx.) Beauv., and in- vaded wetlands were positively correlated with species rich- ness and diversity and negatively correlated with height of vegetation. Typha angustifolia and Equisetum sp. were more abundant in wetlands with above-average vegetation height and below-average diversity and species richness. The sec- ond axis accounted for 7% of the variation in species data and represented a density gradient. Grass species P. arun- dinacea and Calamagrostis canadensis were positively cor- related with density whereas T. angustifolia was negatively correlated with density. Solanum dulcamara and P. arundi- nacea were associated with the gradient of density indicated by the second axis. Phalaris arundinacea was associated with high plant density and Solanum dulcamara with low plant density. Site scores of CA and CCA were highly corre- lated along the first ordination axis (r = 0.97, p < 0.0001, n = 72). Comparison of the unconstrained eigenvalues from CA (1.885) with constrained eigenvalues from CCA (0.624) determined that CCA explained 33% of the variation that was extracted from the data by CA.
Examination of site scores (Fig. 2C) shows that patches invaded by L. salicaria and uninvaded patches are clustered separately, except for a small number of patches that over- lap. Invaded and uninvaded patches are strongly separated along the first axis and less so along the second axis. In- vaded patches are associated with high species richness and diversity and lower density vegetation, while uninvaded patches are associated with lower diversity, lower species richness, and either taller, less dense vegetation or denser vegetation of average height.
Of the eight variables tested using separate univariate split-plot analyses, diversity and species richness were sig- nificantly greater in invaded patches, and average plant height was significantly greater in uninvaded patches (Ta-
ble 3; Fig. 3). When the Bonferroni correction was applied to account for eight individual ANOVAs (α = 0.006), diver- sity and richness remained significantly greater in invaded than in uninvaded patches. It should be noted that water lev- els did not differ significantly between invaded and unin- vaded patches (invaded mean water level = 10.6 cm, SE = 2.2 cm, n = 36, range = 0–46 cm, median = 4 cm; uninvaded meanwaterlevel=5.4cm,SE=1.0cm,n=36,range=0– 26 cm, median = 4 cm).

xdiscussion
Contrary to expectations, increased species richness and diversity were associated with L. salicaria densities and were significantly greater in invaded than in uninvaded wet- land patches. This finding raises three hypotheses as to the cause of this positive association. First, L. salicaria may preferentially invade more diverse vegetation because of some environmental characteristic such as high resource availability (Levine and D’Antonio 1999) that promotes high levels of diversity. Second, some recent event, such as vege- tation disturbance or increasing eutrophication, may have occurred and caused L. salicaria and other species to colo- nize the invaded areas of the wetlands. Finally, L. salicaria may have caused an increase in diversity after its invasion, because of its effects on wetland structure (e.g., micro- topography) and function (e.g., nutrient cycling).
Environmental influences on L. salicaria invasion
Lythrum salicaria gradient
We were better able to characterize the influence of the measured environmental variables on L. salicaria abundance than the influence of L. salicaria on the environment. The three significant environmental variables explained almost twice the variation in the three L. salicaria dependent variables relative to the variation in the seven dependent environmental variables explained by the two significant L. salicaria variables. This is most likely because the larger number of environmental variables have more associated variance than the three L. salicaria variables, making it less probable that the L. salicaria variables would be able to explain a larger proportion of the associated variance. Re- gardless, biotic environmental variables describing the abun- dance of vegetation other than L. salicaria were important in explaining variation in L. salicaria abundance, whereas the two abiotic environmental variables, water level and percent organic matter, were not. Reciprocal ordinations showed that site scores were tightly correlated regardless of which set of variables, L. salicaria or the environment, were explanatory. Density, height, and biomass of other plant species were the important explanatory variables of the L. salicaria abun- dance gradient. As expected, L. salicaria abundance was negatively correlated with density, height, and biomass of other vegetation, indicating that there is some replacement of other vegetation by L. salicaria. However, this pattern might also suggest that dense, abundant vegetation precludes the establishment of L. salicaria. We do not know if a prior disturbance or stochastic decrease in the biomass of the veg- etative community promoted greater L. salicaria abundance in these patches.
Invaded versus uninvaded
Unexpectedly, species richness and diversity were higher and vegetation height was lower in invaded patches than in uninvaded patches. Both univariate and ordination compari- sons of invaded and uninvaded patches revealed significant positive relationships between the presence of L. salicaria and species richness and diversity; increasing L. salicaria abundance was associated with increasing species richness. These results are supported by a previously noted non- significant trend towards a positive relationship between L. salicaria abundance and species richness (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). One possibility is that L. salicaria invades more diverse patches because of the existence of moderately pro- ductive sites where vegetation is patchy. However, evidence from invasions of other species is conflicting; species can invade areas of both high (Stohlgren et al. 1999) and low species richness (Tilman 1997). Other environmental factors that covary with species richness may influence L. salicaria invasions (Levine and D’Antonio 1999).
Two factors suggest that intrinsic characteristics of these wetlands do not consistently promote plant invasions. First, the abundances of L. salicaria, nonnative Solanum dul- camara, and P. arundinacea are not correlated. A similar result was noted previously in wetlands invaded by both L. salicaria and other nonnative plants (Treberg and Hus- band 1999; Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). Second, L. salicaria has only invaded localized patches within wetlands, even though viable L. salicaria seed is present in the sediment in the uninvaded areas of these wetlands (S.B. Yakimowski, H.A. Hager, and C.G. Eckert, unpublished data). We might hypothesize therefore that some external condition or distur- bance promoting high diversity is a cause of invasion in dis- crete patches (Rose et al. 1998), because L. salicaria has not established, although propagules are available. As would be expected, a decrease in stem density of other vegetation is associated with increasing L. salicaria density within invaded patches. However, stem density was inde- pendent of invasion status in the ordination of species abun- dances in invaded and uninvaded patches. This result was corroborated by the nonsignificance of the univariate com- parison of density in invaded and uninvaded patches. The lack of a relationship between stem density and invasion sta- tus suggests that L. salicaria stems have replaced stems of other vegetation on a one-to-one basis.
Three measured environmental factors were unimportant in explaining differences between invaded and uninvaded patches and among species associations: live standing bio- mass, dead standing biomass, and water level. Total dead standing biomass did not differ between invaded and unin- vaded plots, even though L. salicaria stems have been found to have slower decomposition rates than Typha spp. stems (Emery and Perry 1996). While water level was not an im- portant explanatory variable for species densities in invaded and uninvaded patches, water levels are important for deter- mining wetland plant zonation at larger scales (Gosselink and Turner 1978). Prior evidence indicates that L. salicaria populations establish at water levels similar to and deeper than those for T. angustifolia and similar to those for T. latifolia (Jean and Bouchard 1993). Unusually high water levels in spring may be more important in determining com- munity composition than late-season levels (Weiher and Keddy 1995; Weiher et al. 1996). Typha latifolia and T. angustifolia tolerate water depths of 20–60 cm (Grace and Wetzel 1981), while L. salicaria may be less tolerant of these levels (Malecki and Rawinski 1985).
Lythrum salicaria influence on wetlands
Lythrum salicaria gradient
Establishment of L. salicaria may result in alteration of biotic and abiotic wetland conditions, including changes in vegetation structure and composition and ecosystem pro- cesses. Gradients of vegetation height were partly defined by the replacement of some T. angustifolia individuals by L. salicaria. Vegetation height was strongly associated with the presence of T. angustifolia; T. angustifolia was the tallest plant present and consistently reaches heights of up to 2–
3 m (Grace and Harrison 1986). Several shorter species that were associated with T. angustifolia were either only present in uninvaded patches (e.g., Equisetum) or were most often associated with T. angustifolia (e.g., Lysimachia thrysiflora). Lythrum salicaria was associated with shorter vegetation, and the average height of L. salicaria (1–2.7 m, Mal et al. 1992) is less than that of T. angustifolia.
Increasing L. salicaria abundance was correlated with de- creasing abundance of other species. This result corresponds with previous results (Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). However, there was no difference in live or dead vegetation biomass between invaded and uninvaded patches, indicating that aboveground wetland production is altered little by L. salicaria invasion here.
Invaded versus uninvaded
Lythrum salicaria abundance was strongly correlated with high species richness and diversity. Again, without experi- mentation, it is not possible to know whether some initial difference in the patches causes differential L. salicaria inva- sion or whether the measured differences between invaded and uninvaded patches are a result of the invasion. However, invasive species are known to cause many changes when they invade native ecosystems (Gordon 1998), so it would not be unusual if this were the case with L. salicaria. Thus, two hypotheses exist: L. salicaria may invade more diverse areas or its invasion may cause subsequent increases in plant diversity. Evidence from the seed bank (a longer term record of vegetation composition) from some of these wetlands suggests it is possible that an increase in species richness and diversity occurred concurrently with or following L. salicaria invasion. In contrast with current vegetation, the species richness of the seed bank, sampled to a depth of 10 cm, does not differ between invaded and uninvaded patches (S.B. Yakimowski, H.A. Hager, and C.G. Eckert, unpublished data), suggesting that historical conditions of these patches were similar. A mean of two to three plant species was found in the uninvaded patches and in the seed bank from both patch types, whereas twice as many species were found in the current vegetation in invaded patches. One hypothesis is that the length of time since invasion may have not been sufficient for the additional species to accumulate a large seed bank. However, L. salicaria has a perennial rootstock from which new stems grow each season (Mal et al. 1992). As the plant gets older, these rootstocks can form tussocks. Therefore, another hypothesis is that L. salicaria tussocks increase habitat heterogeneity, facilitating the es- tablishment of additional species (Vivian-Smith 1997; Le- vine 2000a).
Differences in species abundance and composition were most strongly separated by differences in sample richness, diversity, and height. Lythrum salicaria, Cicuta bulbifera, Sagittaria latifolia, and Calamagrostis canadensis were pos- itively correlated with invaded wetlands, species richness, and diversity. The latter three native species were most closely associated with the abundance of L. salicaria. Lythrum salicaria invasion here has not resulted in the dis- appearance of all native species, nor has it created mono- specific stands of L. salicaria.
Importance of scale
The vegetation patterns observed here depend on the spa- tial and temporal scale at which invasion is examined. Varia- tion in species densities among invaded and uninvaded sites was better characterized by the measured environmental variables than was the smaller gradient of L. salicaria abun- dance in invaded patches; 33% versus 26% of the variation extracted by CA and PCA was explained by CCA and RDA, respectively. Ordinations of the gradient of L. salicaria abundance may be less explanatory because generally, these sites have more similarities than do uninvaded and invaded sites (Wiser et al. 1998).
The unextractable variance in the direct ordinations could be a result of L. salicaria being at an early, poorly defined stage of invasion. Noise in the data could arise if only small subsets of the environmentally suitable sites for L. salicaria invasion were currently invaded, because floristic gradients extracted by the analysis would not correspond with the measured environmental characteristics (Wiser et al. 1998). At this stage of invasion, examination of dispersal proper- ties, such as distance of invaded sites from source popula- tions and links with water bodies, might be more indicative of the presence of L. salicaria than would environmental characteristics of the sites.
Once invasion has progressed further, and most or all of the environmentally favourable sites are colonized, the envi- ronment should be much more predictive of the presence of L. salicaria (e.g., Wiser et al. 1998). Direct gradient anal- ysis using measured environmental variables explained less variation in species data than was extracted by PCA and CA ordinations, indicating that additional unmeasured variables, such as sediment nutrient concentration or disturbance his- tory, might help to explain the distribution of the L. salicaria variables (ter Braak 1987). Several interrelated environmen- tal factors and vegetation characteristics are thought to affect invasion. For example, eutrophication may cause declines in species richness and loss of rare species (Bedford et al. 1999), allow new species to invade (Davis et al. 2000), and promote L. salicaria success (Weiher et al. 1996). Extreme hydrological events and other disturbances resulting in vege- tation alteration or removal may favour invasion (Weiher and Keddy 1995; D’Antonio et al. 1999; Alpert et al. 2000). Finally, propagule pressure or seed limitation (Williamson and Fitter 1996; Levine 2000a; Turnbull et al. 2000), which
changes with time, since invasion (Wiser et al. 1998) can in- fluence the potential of species to become established in an area. These factors have been little examined on an experi- mental basis for L. salicaria invasion in the field (but see Rachich and Reader 1999; Shadel and Molofsky 2002; Hager 2004).
It is probable that L. salicaria invades patches because initial conditions are suitable for its invasion, but that it also alters the wetland in some way once it has invaded. There is a strong separation of uninvaded and invaded site scores along the first ordination axis, and more variability is exhib- ited among invaded patches than among uninvaded patches. This could indicate an effect of increased structural com- plexity and resource heterogeneity, and may indicate the de- velopment of a sequence of vegetation stages as invasion and spread progress. Thus, we suggest a possible hypothesis that once conditions for L. salicaria germination and population increase occur (e.g., disturbance: Rose et al. 1998; Rachich and Reader 1999, eutrophication: Weiher and Keddy 1995) and L. salicaria becomes established in a patch, it creates more habitat complexity, facilitating the establishment of other species (Vivian-Smith 1997; Levine 2000a, 200b). This could result in a positive invasion feedback whereby more diverse vegetation has more microsites and more inva- sions.
Lythrum salicaria differs from T. angustifolia, the usual dominant plant in these wetlands, in its tissue phosphorus concentration (Emery and Perry 1995) and decomposition rates (Emery and Perry 1996) and has been found associated with lower porewater phosphorus than found for T. an- gustifolia in freshwater tidal marshes (Templer et al. 1998). These factors have been cited as evidence supporting the in- fluence of L. salicaria in altering nutrient cycling rates. It might be expected therefore that L. salicaria abundance would be associated with changes in soil nutrient content. We measured soil organic matter content as an indicator of nutrient availability (Wilson and Keddy 1985). We did not find sediment organic matter content to be strongly corre- lated with L. salicaria abundance. Any changes in nutrient cycling were not reflected in the organic matter content in these wetlands. However, although nutrient availability is of- ten positively correlated with soil organic matter (Silver et al. 1994), C–N–P ratios can vary independently of soil or- ganic matter (Van Oorschot et al. 1997; Bedford et al. 1999). On the scale of whole wetlands, a large difference in L. salicaria and T. angustifolia tissue nutrient concentra- tions could be expected to alter nutrient cycling depending on the productivity and timing of development of each spe- cies in invaded and uninvaded wetlands.
Conclusion
The strongest relationships that emerge from this survey are that wetland patches recently invaded by L. salicaria have higher plant species richness and diversity than unin- vaded patches, and there is no association of other nonnative or weed species with L. salicaria occurrence. This is con- trary both to predictions that L. salicaria should outcompete all other plants and create monocultures (Rawinski and Malecki 1984; Thompson et al. 1987; Weiher and Keddy 1995) and to the idea that invasions of different weedy and invasive species are promoted by similar conditions. How- ever, our results are not dissimilar to previous surveys that detected nonsignificant trends towards similar vegetation re- lationships with L. salicaria invasion in other locations in North America and in different wetland types (Jean and Bouchard 1993; Treberg and Husband 1999; Keller 2000; Farnsworth and Ellis 2001). There is no evidence for altered nutrient availability, although direct measurement of avail- able nitrogen and phosphorus in the soil may be more infor- mative. The observed vegetation patterns raise several hypotheses regarding the causes and effects of L. salicaria invasion. Manipulative field experiments conducted over a range of spatial and temporal scales are needed to evaluate these hypotheses and determine the causes and effects of L. salicaria invasion in wetlands.
