xabstract

Spartina anglica is an exotic perennial grass that can rapidly colonise the intertidal zone of temperate
estuaries and lagoons. Consequently, there is considerable concern about its impact on estuarine flora and fauna.
This study provides the first investigation of ecological impacts by S. anglica in Australia. The objective was to
investigate the impacts of S. anglica on benthic macroinvertebrate communities inhabiting mudflat and native
saltmarsh habitats at Little Swanport estuary, Tasmania. The null hypothesis that species richness and species
abundance of benthic macroinvertebrates in exotic S. anglica marsh does not differ from adjacent native saltmarsh
and mudflat habitats was tested. Eighteen species and 3716 macroinvertebrates were collected from 60 intertidal
core samples in three habitats. Species richness, total abundance of invertebrates, crustacean abundance and
mollusc abundance of mudflat communities were significantly (P < 0.05) lower when compared to those inhabiting
adjacent S. anglica marsh and native saltmarsh. However, species richness and total abundance of invertebrates
of native saltmarsh and S. anglica marsh did not differ significantly. Ordination of macroinvertebrate data
clearly separated mudflat sites from vegetated sites but showed remarkable similarity between exotic and native
vegetated sites.


xintroduction
During the last decade, introduced marine species have
received considerable attention on a global scale
(Carlton 1989, 1994; Leppakoski 1993; Nolan 1993;
1996a; 1996b; Hewitt & Martin 1996). One of the
major concerns for ecologists has been the effect of
these invaders on existing indigenous habitats and
communities (Carlton 1989, 1994). Although many
introduced marine species appear to have relatively
benign effects on existing habitats (Nolan 1993), the
invasion of others can lead to dramatic environmental
change. Spartina anglica provides a good example of
an introduced marine species that can cause dramatic
environmental change to indigenous habitats.
Spartina anglica, commonly referred to as rice grass,
is an emergent saltmarsh grass that colonises the intertidal
zone of temperate estuaries and waterways.
Typically, S. anglica infestations form dense aggregations
of culms, rhizomes and roots that promote sediment
accretion, eventually leading to the formation of
intertidal terraces or saltmarsh islands. The vast
majority of infestations have been found to occur in
intertidal mudflat habitat, although it also occurs in
native saltmarsh, seagrass, mangrove and intertidal seagrass
habitats (Thompson 1991; Blood 1995; Hedge
1997). Prostrate or stout species, such as Salicornia
quinqueflora and Samolus repens or white mangrove
seedlings, Avicennia marina, appear to be particularly
prone to competitive exclusion by S. anglica (Hedge,
1999, personal observation).
Mudflat, saltmarsh, seagrass and mangrove habitats
are valued for the roles they play in estuarine processes
and the provision of habitat for mammals, birds, fish
and many invertebrates (Adam 1985, 1990, 1995;
Saenger 1994, 1995; Inglis 1995; Morrisey 1995).
These habitats also provide important nursery and
feeding habitats for economically important fish species
(Pollard 1981; Saenger 1994, 1995; Connolly et al.
1997). Not surprisingly, there has been considerable
concern and speculation about environmental change
associated with the progressive invasion of S. anglica
in temperate Australia (Bell 1995; Bishop 1995; Blood
1995; Bridgewater 1995; Fotheringham et al. 1995;
Gibbs & Phillips 1995; Simpson 1995; Wells 1995;
Williamson 1995).
There have been no comprehensive studies examining
the ecological impact of S. anglica to Australiaís
estuaries. Most studies have focused on its distribution
(Pringle 1975, 1988 [Condition and distribution of
Spartina anglica (rice grass) in selected estuaries and
inlets along the Bass Strait coast, Tasmania.
Unpublished report for Department of Lands, Parks
and Wildlife, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia], 1993), oron controlling the spread of S. anglica (Wells et al. 1991
[Herbicide trials for the control of Spartina Anglica (rice
grass) at Port Sorell, Tasmania. Internal unpublished
report, Department of Parks, Wildlife and Heritage,
Hobart, Tasmania, Australia]; Bishop 1995; Pritchard
1995). Furthermore, the ecology of habitats threatened
by S. anglica invasion in temperate Australia, particularly
mudflat and saltmarsh, has received little scientific
attention and is poorly understood (Adam 1990,
1995; Robertson 1994; Saenger 1994; Fairweather &
Quinn 1995).
In some cases, the environmental change caused by
S. anglica invasion is clearly visible, providing a relatively
sound basis on which to speculate about the
impacts associated with invasion. For example, at Duck
Bay and Little Swanport estuary in Tasmania, the
spread of S. anglica has transformed intertidal mud-
flats to S. anglica saltmarsh and to a lesser extent displaced
native saltmarsh species (Hedge 1997a). In
Anderson Inlet, Victoria, bird observers note that the
vast majority of wader birds avoid S. anglica (Simpson
1995). The authors have also observed wader birds
avoiding infestations in Tasmania. In other cases, however,
the ecological effects of S. anglica invasion may
be cryptic or difficult to detect. For example, changes
to benthic macroinvertebrate communities of mudflats
are difficult to determine from field observations. Reise
(1985) points out that benthic macroinvertebrates are
an integral component of mudflat habitats and their
biomass is considerably greater than in other tidal flat
communities.
Studies by Jackson (Long & Mason 1983) on
benthic macroinvertebrate communities in the River
Sour, UK, found species richness to be higher in mud-
flat communities than in adjacent S. anglica marsh.
Similar studies by Luiting et al. (1997) examining
impacts of a closely related species, Spartina alterniflora,
in Willapa Bay, WA, USA, found significant differences
between mudflat and vegetated communities; however,
strong seasonal effects on community structure were
apparent in each habitat type. To the contrary, a brief
pilot study by Hedge in the Little Swanport estuary,
Tasmania (1997: Ecology, impact and control of rice
grass (Spartina anglica) in the Little Swanport estuary.
Unpublished technical report submitted to Fishcare,
Australia and the Rice Grass Advisory Group, Hobart)
found benthic macroinvertebrate communities associated
with S. anglica marsh to have higher species richness
and total abundance of invertebrates when
compared with adjacent mudflat communities.
Spartina anglica invasion of native saltmarsh may also
lead to changes in the structure of resident invertebrate
communities. Capehart & Hackney (1989) examined
the effect of three saltmarsh plant structures on
densities of the Carolina saltmarsh clam, Polymesoda
caroliniana. Results showed that invertebrate densities
were inversely related to root and rhizome density, suggesting
that dense root and rhizome aggregrations may
inhibit burrowing animals.
The aim of the study was to examine the effect of
S. anglica invasion on species richness and species
abundance of benthic macroinvertebrate communities
in the Little Swanport estuary, Tasmania. The null
hypothesis was that species richness and species abundance
of benthic macroinvertebrates in exotic Spartina
anglica marsh do not differ significantly when compared with adjacent mudflat and native saltmarsh habitats.
The study also provided new ecological information on
benthic macroinvertebrate communities inhabiting
mudflat and saltmarsh habitat in a temperate Australian
estuary.
Data on environmental variables were collected to
provide additional information to account for observed
community differences between habitats. For example,
variations in underground biomass (Osenga & Coull
1983; Capehart & Hackney 1989), sediment particle
size distribution (Whitlatch 1977, 1981; Edgar & Shaw
1995; Mannino & Montagna 1997) and organic content
of sediments (Whitlatch 1981; Lana & Guiss 1991;
Mannino & Montagna 1997) have been shown to influence
the structure of benthic macroinvertebrate communities.
Furthermore, invasion of mudflat habitat by
Spartina spp. has been shown to alter pre-existing pH
(Chung 1990), salinity (Chung 1990) and oxygen
levels (Osenga & Coull 1983; Lana & Guiss 1991).
Collection of environmental data from a poorly understood
habitat also provided a comparative basis for
future studies in this area.
Temporal and spatial variation in the structure of
benthic macroinvertebrate communities inhabiting
soft-bottom habitats are well documented (Whitlatch
1977; Rainer 1981; Thrush 1991; Mannino &
Montagna 1997). Ideally, impact studies on benthic
communities should be designed to accommodate
interannual, interseasonal and spatial variation.
Nonetheless, a snapshot study, such as this one, can
provide valuable insight into environmental change
associated with an invasive species.



xmethods

The Little Swanport estuary is situated on Tasmaniaís
east coast (148∞00' east, 42∞20' south) (Fig. 1). The
estuary has a single narrow outlet approximately 150
m wide at high tide but considerably narrower at low
tide. Tidal exchange between the estuary and adjacent
marine waters is diurnal with an amplitude of 0.7ñ1 m
(Mitchell 1988). Salinity in the estuary varies considerably
and is affected strongly by rainfall events
(Mitchell 1988). The Little Swanport river is the main
freshwater input to the estuary with mean annual discharge
rates between 1971 and 1981 of approximately
72 188 m3 (Mitchell 1988). Approximate annual rainfall
in the region is 500ñ625 mm with most rain occurring
in winter and spring. Major habitat types in the
estuary include mudflat, saltmarsh, sandflat, seagrass,
reef and rocky shores. In the upper reaches of the
estuary, saltmarsh and mudflat habitats dominate the
intertidal zone. The majority of S. anglica occurs in the To investigate the effect of S. anglica invasion on
macroinvertebrate infaunal communities, 10 sites were
randomly selected from three regions of the S. anglica
infestation within the estuary (Fig. 1). Regions were
selected on the basis that they contained a mosaic of
mudflat, native saltmarsh and S. anglica marsh habitats
at the same tidal height. This stratified random
sampling approach was adopted to represent any
mesoscale spatial variation (distances greater than
hundreds of metres) that may occur within different
areas of infestation. The number of sites was distributed
evenly between each of the three regions. Core
samples in vegetated habitats were taken approximately
2 m in from the leading edge of saltmarsh. Native saltmarsh
flora was dominated by Sarcocornia quinqueflora
with sparse tussocks of Juncus krausii.
Between 22 and 25 August 1997, macroinvertebrate
infaunal communities were sampled by taking two sediment
cores (100 ◊ 150 mm diameter) from each of the
three habitat types at each of the 10 sites. Raffaelli &
Hawkins (1996) point out that the diameter of the core
should be bigger than the largest animal. Results from
a pilot project in Little Swanport estuary (Hedge, 1997,
unpublished data) show that polychaete worms may be
up to 80 mm long; therefore the core size used in this
study (150 mm diameter) was considered suitable.
Sediment samples were sieved in the field through
1 mm mesh to separate animals from roots/rhizomes,
debris and sediments. Sieve contents were bagged and
fixed, immediately after sieving, in 10% buffered formalin
stained with rose bengal. In the laboratory, fixed
invertebrates were systematically separated from debris
in a sorting tray and preserved in 70% alcohol containing
2% glycerol. Invertebrates were classified to
species level where possible using a dissecting microscope. A smaller 100 ◊ 45 mm diameter core sample, located
approximately 5ñ10 cm from each invertebrate core
sample, was taken to determine sediment particle-size
distribution and the proportion of organic materials and
root/rhizome biomass in the sediments. To reduce processing
effort, the paired cores (45 mm diameter) were
amalgamated to provide one composite core per habitat
type at each site. Edgar & Shaw (1993) and Edgar
et al. (1994) have also amalgamated replicate core
samples when determining measures of environmental
variables in benthic habitats. Sediments were dried at
60∞C for 3 days before sieving. Live roots and rhizomes
were removed and dried separately at 60∞C for 3 days.
Composite core samples from each habitat type at
each site were subsampled to determine particle-size istribution and organic content of sediments.
Sediment retained on sieve sizes ñ0.5, 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5,
2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4 and >4 phi was weighed and recorded
as a percentage of the total weight to determine
particle-size distribution. Approximately 30 g of dried
sediment was ashed at 550∞C for 30 min to determine
the organic content of sediments. The differences in
weight between before and after ashing (organic content)
were expressed as a percentage of the total weight.
Salinity (ppt), pH and redox (mV) measurements of
sediment water were collected from all invertebrate core
locations. Salinity was measured with a WTW LF 320 conductivity meter (WissenschaftlichñTechnische
Werkstatten, Weilheim, Germany) fitted with a WTW
Tetracon 325 probe; pH with a WTW pH 320 pH
meter fitted with a WTW SenTix 97T probe; and redox
with the pH meter fitted with a ACTIVON AEP511
Redox-Probe (Activon Scientific Products, Brighton,
Victoria, Australia). All measurements were taken 5 cm
below the sediment surface.Analyses of invertebrate data were based on species
richness and species abundance values. Species richness
has been regarded as a practical and meaningful
way to measure species diversity that also captures
much of the essence of biodiversity (Margules & Usher
1981; Gaston 1996). A variety of univariate and multivariate
techniques were used to examine invertebrate
and environmental data. Non-parametric tests were
used where data failed the normality test (SigmaStat
Analyses Package; Jandel, San Rafael, CA, USA).
The KruskalñWallis one way ANOVA on ranks test was
used to determine differences in species richness and
species abundance among habitats. Spearmanís rank
order correlation was used to investigate the relationship
between environmental and community variables.
Non-parametric multivariate analyses are an effective
method with which to investigate changes in the
community structure of marine benthic invertebrates
(Clarke 1993). The PATN computer program
(Manufacturer?, City?, Country?) was used to examine
ecological relationships between habitats, sites and
cores (Belbin 1991; Clarke 1993). Association between
cores and sites, based on the BrayñCurtis measure of
dissimilarity, was determined by constructing an association
matrix (ASO). When community and environmental
data were combined, data were standardised
using the ëaverage rankí option. The ASO matrix of
similarity was used to: (i) classify the sites or cores into
groups by hierarchical polythetic agglomerative clustering
and (ii) map the interrelationships between sites
and cores in an ordination.
Inter relationships between sites and cores were
mapped in an ordination using semistrong hybrid
(SSH) multidimensional scaling (MDS). Data generated
by this technique were expressed in three dimensions.
However, only two of the three dimensions were
chosen to map interrelationships. This is a commonly
used and acceptable technique provided that the stress
value of the ordination is sufficiently low (Clarke 1993).
Ordination was accepted if stress values were less than
0.15. The stress value is a measure of goodness of fit
for the data; values less than 0.15 are considered
acceptable (Belbin 1991; Clarke 1993; Wong et al.
1993).
A Monte Carlo test (MCAO) was used to identify
taxa and environmental variables significantly correlated
with the ordination space. Results of ordination
analyses were displayed as a scatterplot. Similarity
between cores and sites is proportional to the distance
between points (i.e. the smaller the distance between
points the greater their similarity). Taxa and environmental
variables considered to be significantly correlated
with the ordination space, based on results of
the MCAO test, were plotted as vectors in the same
ordination space.


xresults



A total of 18 species and 3716 individuals was collected
from 60 intertidal core samples in three habitats. Ten
species and 272 individuals were collected from mud-
flat habitat which was dominated by the annelid,
Nephtys australiensis, the amphipod, Paracorophium sp.,
and the molluscs, Salinator fragilis and Arthritica semen.
Thirteen species and 1824 individuals were collected
from native saltmarsh. In S. anglica marsh, 16 species
and 1620 individuals were collected. Both S. anglica
marsh and native saltmarsh were dominated by the
molluscs, Hydrococcus brazieri and Tatea rufilabris, and
the amphipod Eorchestia palustris. Salinator fragilis was
only found in mudflat habitats; conversely, Salinator solida
was only found in vegetated habitat. The annelid,
Boccardia sp., was common in native saltmarsh but rare
in S. anglica and mudflat habitats. Table 1 provides a list
of invertebrate species abundances in each habitat type.Mean ± SE values of environmental variables for each
habitat sites are detailed in Table 2. Mean temperature
and salinity of sediment water over the sampling period
was similar for all habitat types. Redox values of sediment
pore water differed significantly between habitats
(ANOVA F2,57 = 19.8, P < 0.001). StudentñNeumannñ
Keulls (SNK) comparisons showed that all habitats
were significantly different when compared with each
other.
Differences in the organic content of sediments
between sites were not considered to be significant
(KruskalñWallis ANOVA H2 = 1.59, P = 0.452). Differences
in the biomass of roots and rhizomes between
vegetated sites were not considered to be significant
(Studentís t-test t18 = 1.75, P = 0.098). However, the
power of the performed test (0.2604) is below the
desired power (0.8) to exclude the possibility that a type
II error has occurred. Modal sediment size varied considerably
between sites but not between habitats.
However, at sites 5ñ7, modal sediment size of native saltmarsh sediments (phi 4) was smaller than mudflat
(phi 2.5) and S. anglica marsh (modal phi 2.5ñ3) Total abundance of invertebrates per core sample differed
significantly between habitats (KruskalñWallis
ANOVA H2 = 34.5, P < 0.001), with that of mudflats significantly
lower (11) than in native saltmarsh (53) and
S. anglica marsh (44), which did not differ (Table 1).
Species richness per core sample differed significantly
between habitats (KruskalñWallis ANOVA F2,57 = 12.5,
P < 0.001), with that of mudflat habitat (3.25) lower
than in S. anglica marsh (5.85) and native saltmarsh
(5.65), which did not differ (Table 1).
Mollusc abundance per core sample and crustacean
abundance per core both differed significantly between
habitats (KruskalñWallis ANOVA H2 = 35.3, P < 0.001)
and KruskalñWallis SNK comparisons showed that
mollusc and crustacean abundance in mudflat habitat
were lower than in native saltmarsh and S. anglica
marsh. Native saltmarsh and S. anglica marsh were not
different in either mollusc or crustacean abundance.
Polychaete abundance per core between habitats did
not differ significantly (KruskalñWallis ANOVA H2 =
2.92, P = 0.233).
Total abundance of invertebrates was significantly
correlated (Spearman rank order, P < 0.05) with the
redox values, organic matter and silt content of sediments.
Biomass of roots and rhizomes and total abundance
of invertebrates were also significantly correlated
(Spearman rank order P < 0.001). Species richness was
significantly correlated with biomass (Spearman rank
order P < 0.001), but not with organic matter, redox
values or silt content of the sediments.Ordination (SSH MDS, three dimension, stress 0.113)
of sites based on abundance of 18 taxa clearly separated
mudflat communities (upper right sector of ordination
space) from vegetated communities (Fig. 2).
Sites from native saltmarsh and S. anglica marsh were
generally grouped together on the left sector of the ordination
space. Furthermore, vegetated sites were tightly
grouped relative to mudflat sites. Ordination (SSH
MDS, three dimension, stress = 0.143) of core
samples also clearly separated mudflat from vegetated
communities (ordination not shown)
 Ordination (SSH MDS, three dimension, stress =
0.145) of sites based on taxa and environmental
characteristics separated mudflat sites from vegetated
sites (Fig. 3). Although there is dissimilarity between
vegetated sites, distinct differences between native saltmarsh
and S. anglica sites were not apparent. Sites in
Luttrells Bay (sites 8ñ10) showed some degree of
similarity forming two main groups in the right sector
of the ordination space: vegetated sites and mudflats.
Seven taxa and five environmental characteristics were
significantly (P < 0.01) correlated with the ordination
space on the basis of a Monte Carlo test (Table 3).
Figure 4 illustrates these variables as vectors in the same
ordination space. Generally, S. fragilis and relatively
high pH values are associated with mudflat habitat,
while S. solida, H. brazieri, E. palustris, T. rufilabris, biomass
and relatively high redox values are associated
with vegetated habitats. Ordination (SSH MDS, three
dimension, stress = 0.149) of core samples based on
18 benthic invertebrate taxa and environmental characteristics
also separated mudflat from vegetated sites
(ordination not shown).
xdiscussion

With the exception of a pilot project conducted by
Hedge (1997, unpublished data), this study provides
the first detailed and comprehensive investigation of
S. anglica impacts to intertidal fauna in Australia.
Studies examining the impact of exotic Spartina on
intertidal fauna in the River Sour, England (Jackson
1985) and Willapa Bay, WA, USA (Luiting et al. 1997)
have been based on a two-way comparison between
invaded mudflats and adjacent uncolonised mudflats.
The design of this study, a three-way comparison of
mudflat, native saltmarsh and S. anglica marsh habitat,
appears to be unique.
Results indicate that during the winter in the Little
Swanport estuary, species richness and species abundance
of benthic macroinvertebrate communities associated
with S. anglica marsh are significantly different
when compared to that of adjacent mudflats. However,
differences in species diversity and total abundance of
invertebrates between S. anglica marsh and native saltmarsh
were not statistically significant. Univariate
analyses show that species richness, total abundance of
invertebrates, crustacean abundance and mollusc abundance
were all significantly higher in native saltmarsh
and S. anglica marsh than in adjacent mudflats.
Furthermore, multivariate analyses (ordination and
cluster analyses) based on benthic macroinvertebrate
taxa and habitat variables consistently separated sites
and cores into two main groups: those representing
mudflat habitat and those representing vegetated habitat.
Thus, the results of this study provide evidence to
suggest that the null hypothesis should be rejected in
that species richness and species abundance of benthic
macroinvertebrates in exotic S. anglica marsh does
differ significantly when compared with adjacent
uninvaded mudflat habitats. However, there are
elements of the habitat for which this may not hold true.
The study found that there were no significant differences
between communities of native saltmarsh and
exotic S. anglica.
The most abundant and widespread species inhabiting
mudflat was N. australiensis, with this polychaete
present in 95% of mudflat core samples. Other subdominant
species, such as Paracorophium sp., S. fragilis
and A. semen were patchy in their distribution,
occurring in less than 45% of core samples. Salinator
fragilis, a widespread estuarine mollusc (Edgar 1997),
was the only species to occur exclusively in mudflat
habitat, all other mudflat species inhabited S. anglica
marsh. Macroinvertebrate assemblages of native saltmarsh
and S. anglica marsh showed a remarkable
degree of similarity, particularly with regard to abundance
of dominant species (e.g. H. brazieri, T. rufilabris,
E. palustris and N. australiensis). However, the spionid
polychaete, Boccardia sp. was more abundant in native
saltmarsh than in S. anglica marsh.
Differences in benthic macroinvertebrate assemblages
between habitat types may be attributed to a
variety of factors. When S. anglica invades mudflat or
native saltmarsh, subterranean habitat structure is
altered. In the case of mudflats, the presence of dense
networks of culms, rhizomes and roots after Spartina
invasion increases habitat complexity and heterogeneity
(Lana & Guiss 1991; Flynn et al. 1996).
Spartina invasion may also alter habitat complexity and
heterogeneity of native saltmarshes (Capehart &
Hackney 1989). However, our results did not find
significant differences in species richness and total
abundance of invertebrates between vegetated habitats.
Begon et al. (1996) point out that increases in spatial heterogeneity may correspond with increases in species
richness and effects on species abundance (Pickett &
Cadenasso 1995; Begon et al. 1996).
Spartina roots and rhizomes can actively contribute
to sediment oxygenation, encouraging faunal colonisation
(Teal & Wieser 1966; Osenga & Coull 1983;
Lana & Guiss 1991). Results of this study show
that sediment redox values were significantly higher
(P < 0.05) in S. anglica marsh than adjacent mudflats
and that redox and total abundance of invertebrates
were positively correlated (rs = 0.39, P = 0.01). Thus,
higher species richness and invertebrate abundance of
macrofaunal communities inhabiting S. anglica marsh,
relative to those inhabiting mudflats, may be attributed
to increases in habitat complexity, spatial heterogeneity
and sediment oxygenation resulting from S. anglica
invasion.
Other factors that may influence macrofaunal assemblages
are resource availability and predation pressure.
S. anglica is a highly productive saltmarsh plant (Long
& Mason 1983; Adam 1990). Although studies in the
temperate northern hemisphere show that only a small
percentage of its biomass is grazed by herbivores (Long
& Mason 1983), its contribution to the detrital food
web is substantial and may be directly linked to
increased secondary production. Chung (1990) and
Doody (1990) claim that mudflat and estuarine productivity
is increased after S. anglica invasion.
Furthermore, Lana & Guiss (1991) point out that
S. alterniflora detritus promotes the abundance of
macroinvertebrates. Results of our study show that
species abundances of benthic macroinvertebrates
inhabiting S. anglica marsh are almost six times that
of adjacent mudflats. Furthermore, total abundance
of invertebrates was positively correlated (rs = 0.69,
P < 0.001) with the root and rhizome biomass of
vegetated sites.
Spartina anglica marsh may also provide a refuge for
resident fauna by providing protection from abiotic
stresses or predation. For example, the dense aggregation
of S. anglica culms may provide shade and reduce
wind velocities thus mitigating the effects of desiccation
on epibenthic fauna. Fish and wader birds are prominent
predators on mudflats. Minello & Zimmerman
(1983) examined the effects of simulated Spartina on
predation rates of estuarine fish. They found that vegetative
structure reduced predation rates of pinfish,
Lagodon rhomboides, and Atlantic croaker, Micropogonias
undulatus. Furthermore, resident and migratory wader
birds exert heavy predation pressure on mudflat
macroinvertebrate communities (Long & Mason 1983;
Reise 1985; Inglis 1995). Reports from Victoria,
Australia (Simpson 1995) and England (Evans 1986;
Goss-Custard & Moser 1990) state that wader birds
avoid S. anglica infested mudflats. Thus, invasion of
mudflats by S. anglica may promote species abundance
and species richness of macroinvertebrates by providing a refuge from abiotic stresses and reducing predation
pressure.In the preceding summer (February 1996) Hedge
(1997, unpublished) conducted a similar study on
macroinvertebrate communities of S. anglica marsh and
adjacent mudflats in a nearby region of the Little
Swanport estuary. Species richness and total abundance
of invertebrates were significantly higher in
S. anglica marsh. Furthermore, multivariate analyses
based on macroinvertebrate taxa of core samples produced
two main groupings: cores taken from mudflats
and cores taken from S. anglica marsh. There are
notable differences in macrofaunal assemblages
reported by Hedge (1997, unpublished) and the
assemblages reported in this study. Seasonal and
temporal fluctuations in benthic macrofaunal assemblages
are well documented (Reise 1985; Lana &
Guiss 1991; Thrush 1991; Edgar & Shaw 1993;
Mannino & Montagna 1997; Wilson et al. 1999).
Higher species richness is likely to have been influenced
by increased sampling effort (increased number of core
samples).
Research in the UK (Long & Mason 1983; Jackson
et al. 1985), the USA (Luiting et al. 1997) and in Brazil
(Lana & Guiss 1991) have compared the structure of
benthic invertebrate communities inhabiting mudflat
and adjacent vegetated communities. Results from
these studies indicate that there are significant differences
in species richness and species abundance
between habitat types. However, differences are
variable between habitats and appear to be strongly
influenced by seasonality. Furthermore, when comparing
studies of these different regions, the responses
of resident faunal assemblages to invasion are inconsistent.
In conclusion, the results of this study provide
evidence suggesting that S. anglica invasion of mudflat
habitat in Little Swanport estuary may significantly
promote a more species rich and abundant macrobenthos.
Of notable interest, however, was that
communities associated with S. anglica marsh are
remarkably similiar to those associated with native saltmarsh
occurring at a similar tidal height. In the light
of these results, it is tempting to speculate that S. anglica
invasion may not necessarily constitute a major ecological
threat to Australiaís temperate estuaries.
However, the results of this study should be considered
to be a snapshot only, and due consideration should
be made for the temporal and spatial variation that
characterizes benthic communities of soft-bottom habitats.
Furthermore, this study has only examined a relatively
small component of a complex estuarine system.
Unfortunately, there are no other known empirical
studies examining the effects of S. anglica invasion on
the flora or fauna of Australiaís temperate estuaries.