xabstract


1. Non-native trout have been stocked in streams and lakes worldwide largely without
knowledge of the consequences for native ecosystems. Although trout have been
introduced widely throughout the Sierra Nevada of California, U.S.A., fishless streams and
their communities of native invertebrates persist in some high elevation areas, providing
an opportunity to study the effects of trout introductions on natural fishless stream
communities.
2. We compared algal biomass and cover, organic matter levels and invertebrate
assemblages in 21 natural fishless headwater streams with 21 paired nearby streams
containing stocked trout in Yosemite National Park.
3. Although environmental conditions and particulate organic matter levels did not differ
between the fishless and trout streams, algal biomass (as chlorophyll a concentration) and
macroalgal cover were, on average, approximately two times and five times higher,
respectively, in streams containing trout.
4. There were no differences in the overall densities of invertebrates in fishless versus
paired trout streams; however, invertebrate richness (after rarefaction), evenness, and
Simpson and Shannon diversities were 10ñ20% higher in fishless than in trout streams.
5. The densities of invertebrates belonging to the scraper-algivore and predator functional
feeding guilds were higher, and those for the collector-gatherer guild lower, in fishless
than trout streams, but there was considerable variation in the effects of trout on specific
taxa within functional feeding groups.
6. We found that the densities of 10 of 50 common native invertebrate taxa (found in
more than half of the stream pairs) were reduced in trout compared to fishless streams.
A similar number of rarer taxa also were absent or less abundant in the presence of trout.
Many of the taxa that declined with trout were conspicuous forms (by size and behaviour)
whose native habitats are primarily high elevation montane streams above the original
range of trout.
7. Only a few taxa increased in the presence of trout, possibly benefiting from reductions in
their competitors and predators by trout predation.
8. These field studies provide catchment-scale evidence showing the selective influence of
introduced trout on stream invertebrate and algal communities. Removal of trout from

 targeted headwater streams may promote the recovery of native taxa, community
structure and trophic organisation.

xintroduction

Although predators are known to have profound
effects on the densities, distributions and behaviours
of many prey species, others appear to be unaffected.
Questions about how and why the influence of
predation varies in regulating the population dynamics
and community structure of prey have led to an
increasing research focus on the factors and circumstances
which determine predator impacts (PI) on
different prey taxa, and on the trophic organisation of
different ecosystems (Sih et al., 1985; Shurin et al.,
2002; Englund & Cooper, 2003).
Among the most widespread predators in coldwater
streams are salmonid fishes, particularly trout in
the genera Salmo, Salvelinus and Oncorhynchus, which
have been introduced to streams and rivers around the
world (MacCrimmon, 1971; Crowl, Townsend &
McIntosh, 1992; Moyle & Cech, 1996; McDowall,
2006). The ecological roles of native and exotic trout
have been studied in a variety of settings at differing
spatial scales in streams, and study results have
ranged from no effects to large impacts on invertebrate
and algal abundances (Allan, 1982; Harvey, 1993;
Wootton & Power, 1993; Diehl et al., 2000; Nystro®m,
McIntosh & Winterbourn, 2003; McIntosh, Peckarsky
& Taylor, 2004). Because of these mixed results,
scientists have continued to examine how trout affect
lower trophic levels in streams in different regions, to
determine if any generalities about the factors influencing
trout impacts on prey, and their preyís food,
can be derived (Meissner & Muotka, 2006).
Historically, river drainages above waterfall barriers
(typically above 1800 m elevation) in the Sierra
Nevada of California lacked fish; with extensive fish
stocking, however, 90% of Sierra Nevada streams
outside of the National Parks, and 60% inside the
Parks, currently contain introduced trout populations
(Moyle, Yoshiyama & Knapp, 1996a). Although recent
studies have shown substantial impacts of introduced
trout on zooplankton, benthic invertebrate and
amphibian communities in Sierran lakes (Stoddard,
1987; Bradford et al., 1998; Knapp et al., 2005), the
effects of trout on Sierran stream communities are
unknown. Most high elevation streams in the Sierra
lack native vertebrate species, so stream communities
are dominated by benthic invertebrates which play
central roles in food webs, show high levels of
endemism (e.g. 25% of stonefly and 19% of caddisfly
species; Erman, 1996), and act as sensitive indicators
of environmental change (Herbst, 2004). The objectives
of our research, then, were to compare algal
biomass and cover, particulate organic matter levels,
and the structure and diversity of benthic invertebrate
communities in fishless headwater streams to those in
paired, nearby, historically fishless streams now
containing introduced trout. Because we did not
manipulate trout directly, we matched environmental
conditions between trout and fishless stream pairs as
closely as possible to minimise the effects of confounding
variables that could alter or obscure relationships
between response variables and trout
presence. We hypothesised that trout streams would
have a lower diversity of native invertebrates, altered
community and trophic structure, and elevated algal
biomass compared to fishless streams. By generating
data on introduced trout impacts, our results also
provide recommendations for the management of
native biodiversity and stream ecosystems in the
Sierra Nevada.

xmethods

Because trout have been stocked extensively in high
altitude lakes and streams throughout the Sierra
Nevada, few streams exist in their original, fishless
state. To select study sites we first surveyed more than
100 headwater streams that we thought lacked trout
based, in part, on information on trout distributions in
Yosemite National Park (L. Marnell, unpubl. data).
From these surveys, we found 68 fishless streams and
selected 21 for detailed study. From topographic
 maps, we then identified nearby candidate trout
streams for pairing with these 21 fishless streams
based on stream elevation, catchment aspect and area,
location within the catchment, and proximity to the
paired fishless streams (Table 1). These small headwater
streams (first and second order) were shallow,
open and very clear, permitting unobstructed views
for confirming the presence or absence of fish.
Further, most of these streams were not exposed to
fishing or other human disturbances, so trout usually
continued normal behaviour during observations. We
located possible physical barriers (waterfalls and
steep cascades) to trout migration on each fishless
stream, then verified through visual observations that
trout were found below but not above these barriers
(i.e. habitat was appropriate but trout entry was
blocked) Surveys were conducted in early July through late
September of the summers of 2000 and 2001, and all
our paired sites were exposed to the same antecedent
weather because they were always sampled within 1ñ
2 days of each other. Stream sites ranged in elevation
from 1348 to 3165 m, and were dispersed throughout
the upper catchments of both the Merced and Tuolumne
Rivers, the major drainages of Yosemite National
Park.
At the upstream end of each 150-m study reach, we
measured stream pH, temperature and conductivity
using an Oakton model pH /Con10 meter (Oakton
Instruments, Vernon Hills, IL, U.S.A.), and alkalinity
with a LaMotte titration kit (LaMotte Company,
Chestertown, MD, U.S.A.). Water samples were taken
for analysis of turbidity and, after filtration through
GF /F filters and filtrate acidification, nutrient chemistry.
Physical and biological habitat features, including
water depth, substrata particle sizes and the presence
or absence of macroalgae, were measured at three
equally spaced points across the wetted width of each
stream at each of 10 transects spaced at 15-m intervals
along the reach, beginning at the lowest end and
continuing upstream (for a total of 30 point-intercept
observations per reach, encompassing both riffle and
pool habitats). Riparian canopy cover was measured at
the left bank, at the channel center upstream and
downstream, and at the right bank using a concave
densiometer (Platts et al., 1987). Maximum stream
depth was the deepest point recorded among all deep
pools in a study reach. Stream gradient was measured
with a clinometer over six 25-m intervals in each 150-m
reach, latitude and longitude were recorded using a
GPS unit, and the elevation of each reach was
determined from USGS topographic maps.
Invertebrate samples were taken with a D-frame
kick net (250 lm mesh, 30 cm opening, 0.093 m2
sample area) from five riffles and five pools in each
reach. We combined three samples from each riffle
into a composite sample, giving 15 total riffle samples
from each reach, whereas one sample was taken from
each pool, for a total of 20 samples per study reach
(c. 1.9 m2). At each riffle sampling point, the bottom of
the net frame was placed against the stream bottom
and surface substrata within a 30 cm square area
above the net were lifted, turned, and rubbed by
hand, with dislodged invertebrates and organic material
being swept into the net by currents. The length of
the net bag (50 cm), and the typically narrow, shallow
and swift stream conditions insured efficient collection
with little loss of dislodged materials around the
sides of the net or from back-wash. In pools, this
process was aided by hand sweeping stirred materials
into the net, as well as by sweeping the net through
dislodged matter in the water column. Sample materials
were placed in a small bucket, then repeatedly
elutriated and filtered through a 100 lm mesh net,
until all light material was removed, and preserved
and stored in 95% ethanol. Remaining gravel and
sand in elutriated samples was inspected for heavy
taxa, such as cased caddisflies and molluscs, which
were removed and added to storage bottles.
Each coarse particulate organic matter (CPOM) and
fine particulate organic matter (FPOM) sample
consisted of three combined D-frame net collections,
as for invertebrate samples, and were taken from each
of three riffles in the lower, middle and upper 50 m of
each sampling reach (total area per reach sampled = c.
0.85 m2). All material collected in the 250 lm mesh
net was washed into a small bucket, repeatedly
elutriated to separate gravel and sand from organic
material, then filtered through a 1 mm mesh net. After
removal of large invertebrates from the 1 mm mesh
collection, the CPOM (á1 mm) material remaining in
the net was blotted to remove excess water then
weighed on a small Pesola scale (wet mass). The
FPOM passing through the 1 mm mesh into a bucket
was filtered through a 100 lm net after removal of
conspicuous invertebrates, transferred to a storage
vial, and preserved with 4% buffered formalin to
prevent microbial degradation.
Epilithic algae samples were taken from three
cobbles in each stream, with one cobble collected in
the center of each of three, separate riffles, avoiding
locations already sampled for POM or invertebrates.
Each cobble was removed to a pan containing water,
brushed with a nylon brush, and rinsed, then suspended
material was stirred and passed through a
fine net (100 lm) into a graduated cylinder with any
macroalgae retained in the net being added to the
cylinder. The total volume of the filtered suspension
was recorded, then homogenised by repeated suction
and expulsion using a 60 mL syringe, and a subsample
filtered through a pre-weighed glass fibre
filter (GF /F). The filtered material was protected from
microbial degradation with a drop of buffered formalin
and the filter then folded into aluminium foil to
prevent exposure to light, and stored in an ice chest
(usually not more than 1 day) before storage in a
freezer. The length, width, height and circumference
of each sampled cobble were recorded to obtain a
measure of the upper cobble surface area so that areal
chlorophyll concentration could be calculated.
All field survey and sample processing methods
were identical across all of the stream sites surveyed,
insuring that the values of all response variables could
be rigorously compared between paired streams. The ash-free dry mass (AFDM) of FPOM was determined
by drying FPOM samples overnight at 75 C,
then measuring the weight lost from these samples after 3 h at 550 C in a muffle furnace. Chlorophyll
a concentration was measured on a Turner Model No.
110 Fluorometer using a 90% ethanol extraction
method (Sartory & Grobbelaar, 1984). We measured
soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP) using the ammonium
molybdate method, nitrateñnitrite (NO3 + NO2)
using the cadmium reduction column method, and
ammonia (NH3) using the phenol-hypochlorite method
for each of the duplicate samples from each stream
(American Public Health Association (APHA), American
Water Works Association and Water Environment
Federation, 1992). Turbidity was measured on
an Orbeco-Hellige Model 966 Turbidimeter (OrbecoHellige
Inc., Sarasota, FL, U.S.A.).
Random subsamples of macroinvertebrates were
obtained using a Folsom plankton splitter so that 300ñ
1000 organisms were identified and counted in each
subsample. Invertebrates were identified to the lowest
practical taxonomic level, usually genus or species,
although some taxa represented coarser levels of
taxonomic resolution. We also searched the unprocessed
remnant of each entire sample for large and /or
rare taxa that did not occur in the processed
subsample and single specimens of these taxa were
included in the count.
The length and gradient of the upstream catchment
were estimated for each stream site based on USGS
topographic maps (1 : 24 000 scale). The cumulative
length of perennial streams above each site (upstream
length) was measured as the sum of the lengths of the
main stem and all perennial tributaries upstream of
the sampled reach. The average gradient of perennial
streams in the catchment (upstream gradient) above
each study site was measured as the summed elevation
gains of the main stem and all tributaries
upstream to the headwater origins divided by total
upstream length.
Mean values of environmental variables (e.g. nutrient
concentrations, physical characteristics, canopy cover)
were used to characterise conditions in each stream
reach. We calculated invertebrate densities based on
the fraction of each sample that was sorted and the
bottom area sampled, and used mean densities for
each invertebrate taxon from each stream reach as the
replicates in statistical analyses. The final mean
densities for each study reach were obtained by
averaging density estimates for the five composite
riffle samples and five pool samples, equalising the
representation of riffle and pool habitats so that there
was no geomorphic bias when comparing paired sites.
Although they usually did not affect conclusions,
some pool-riffle differences are presented in more
detail later in this paper. We used paired t-tests to
compare values for most environmental variables in
fishless versus paired trout streams and paired
Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for comparing biological
response variables across paired streams (community
metrics, algae and detrital resources, and densities of
50 ëcommoní invertebrate taxa). We used the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test for biological data because
transformation did not meet parametric assumptions
and could not be applied to the positive and negative
values found for paired differences in taxa densities
between trout and fishless streams. Although sacrificing
quantitative information, this test could be
applied uniformly across all common taxa and was
statistically appropriate for the paired study design.
We defined ëcommoní as invertebrate taxa having a
mean relative abundance across all streams greater
than 0.1% and/or which were present in at least half
of the stream pairs sampled (11 or more of the 21
pairs). Community and resource metrics included the
biomass of benthic algae (measured as chlorophyll a
concentration), macroalgal cover, levels of CPOM and
FPOM, the total densities (with and without Chironomidae),
richness [standardised via rarefaction using
Hurlbertís (1971) formulae], evenness (Pielou, 1966),
and Simpson and Shannon diversities of invertebrates,
and densities of invertebrate functional
feeding groups. We assigned invertebrate taxa to
grazer-scraper, predator (not including water mites
and ceratopogonids which were classified as micropredators),
filterer, shredder and collector-gatherer
functional feeding groups based on the designations
in Merritt, Cummins & Berg (2008), but excluding
undifferentiated Chironomidae because of their possible
assignment to multiple functional groups.
We used both absolute and/or relative differences in
invertebrate and functional feeding group (FFG)
densities, and algal biomass, between fishless and trout
streams as indicators of trout impacts. Absolute differences
provide a measure of changes in invertebrate taxa
or functional feeding group densities in response to
trout presence, whereas the log ratio of invertebrate or
functional feeding group density in trout versus fishless streams (i.e. ln[(x + 1)trout /(x + 1)no trout])
provides a standardised index of proportionate trout
effects on response variables, has a variety of desirable
statistical properties, and can be related to an extensive
theoretical and empirical literature on predator
effects on prey populations (Hedges, Gurevitch &
Curtis, 1999; Osenberg et al., 1999). These measures
of cascade strength (for resources) and PI (for
invertebrate taxa) were calculated for each stream
pair where the resource or taxon was found, and
means (±2 SEs, c. confidence interval) were calculated
from these families of values from paired streams.
Differences in the structure (i.e. taxonomic composition
and relative abundances of component taxa) of
invertebrate assemblages between trout and troutless
streams also were examined using Non-metric multidimensional
scaling (NMDS, Sammonís algorithm
implemented in S-Plus; Insightful Corp, 2001), which
displayed relationships among streams in two-dimensional
space based on stream-to-stream similarities in
invertebrate assemblages. We calculated BrayñCurtis
distances between all pairs of streams using relative
abundance data for all taxa collected at each site. The
BrayñCurtis metric provides linear increases in
weighting as the relative abundances of component
species increase and performs as well or better than
comparable similarity measures in capturing simulated
ecological patterns when used with proportional
data (Faith, Minchin & Belbin, 1987).

xresults



All physical, chemical and geomorphic variables were
similar in fishless and trout streams (Table 2). The close
matching of environmental conditions in fishless and
trout streams was apparent both when comparing the
range and mean values of habitat variables over all trout
to all fishless streams as well as when examining the
differences between paired trout and fishless streams.
Algal biomass (measured as chlorophyll a concentration)
and macroalgal cover were significantly greater in streams with introduced trout than in paired
fishless streams (Fig. 1). Algal biomass was typically
57% (median) to 98% (mean) higher in trout than
fishless streams, and macroalgae cover increased from
an average of 4% in fishless streams to 22% in trout
streams, primarily owing to five stream pairs where
macroalgal cover was 0% in the fishless streams and
40ñ80% in the paired trout streams. There were no
significant differences in FPOM or CPOM levels
between fishless and paired trout streams (Fig. 1).
We collected 171 invertebrate taxa across all streams
in this study, and have amalgamated those into 109
taxa because an individual taxon dominated a group
or because some taxa within a group could not be
easily distinguished (Tables 3 & 4). Of these 109 taxa,
50 were designated as ëcommoní and another 32 were
designated as ëuncommoní (occurring in 3ñ10 stream
pairs and at a relative abundance of <0.1%). The
results for the remaining 27 rare taxa, with the
exception of one taxon of special interest (i.e.
Edmundsius agilis), are not treated in this paper.
The total abundance of invertebrates (excluding and
including the numerically dominant but small Chironomidae)
was similar in trout and troutless streams
(Fig. 2a). Community evenness, taxa richness (standardised
via rarefaction), and Simpson and Shannon
diversities, however, were significantly lower in
streams with than without introduced trout.
Although other analyses indicated that portions of
the invertebrate community were altered by trout (see
below), multivariate ordination of the full invertebrate
assemblage data (excluding Chironomidae, which
were identified to family) revealed no clear patterns
in the distribution of fishless and trout streams in twodimensional
ordination space (Fig. 3, stress = 0.09;
ordination similar with Chironomidae included).
Paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on NMDS axis
scores for trout versus paired fishless streams provided
little evidence that this pattern was nonrandom
(P = 0.22 for axis 1, P = 0.16 for axis 2). In
general, fishlessñtrout stream pairs were neither closer
together (more similar) or further apart from one
another than they were to other streams.
In contrast to the multivariate results, the abundances
of some functional feeding groups appeared to
be affected by trout presence (Fig. 2b). The abundances
of invertebrate grazer/ scrapers and predators
were reduced, the densities of filterers and shredders
were relatively unaffected, and the abundances of
collector-gatherers were elevated in the presence
versus absence of trout (Fig. 2b).
Although the densities of several functional feeding
groups were different in trout versus fishless streams,
we also found substantial variation in the responses of
individual taxa to trout presence, even within a
functional feeding group. Densities of seven common
invertebrate taxa consistently declined from fishless to
trout streams across all but one or two stream pairs
(Table 3). These seven common taxa included one mayfly (Ameletus), two Perlidae stoneflies (Doroneuria
baumanni and Hesperoperla), three cased caddisflies
(Anagapetus, Yphria californica and Neothremma) and
one non-insect taxon (Tricladida flatworms). For three
of these invertebrate taxa (Ameletus, Doroneuria baumanni
and Tricladida flatworms), declines in abundance
from fishless to fish streams were highly
significant (P < 0.001), falling below Bonferroni correction
thresholds for statistical significance (i.e.
0.05 /50 = 0.001 for the 50 ëcommoní taxa evaluated
statistically). For the remaining four of these seven
taxa, P-values for statistical tests fell between 0.05 and
0.001, providing strong evidence that patterns were
non-random. Large declines from fishless to trout
streams (and P-values <0.05) also were observed for
the mayfly Paraleptophlebia, the net-spinning caddisfly
family Hydropsychidae (mostly Parapsyche), and the
dipteran Dixa, whereas nymphs of the mayfly Centroptilum
were one of the few taxa found to be more
abundant in trout streams compared to paired fishless
streams. There were suggestive differences in densities
for a number of other taxa between trout and
paired fishless streams, including the Chironomidae
being higher (P = 0.10, Table 3) and the caddisfly
Cryptochia being lower (P = 0.08, Table 3), in trout
compared to paired troutless streams.
We note, however, that statistical power was insuf-
ficient to detect potential trout effects in a number of
these tests because of high variability in the difference
estimates among stream pairs. Even relatively large
differences between fishless and paired trout streams
did not always provide strong (P < 0.05) statistical
evidence that patterns were non-random, and test
power was drastically reduced by the application of
Bonferroni corrections (Gotelli & Ellison, 2004). For
example, the median difference between trout and
troutless streams for Chironomidae abundance translates
to a 45% increase in this group in trout streams,
but the results of the Wilcoxon signed-rank test did not
meet either a simple (a = 0.05) or comparison-wise
adjusted error rate (a = 0.001, Bonferroni correction)
for rejecting the null hypothesis of no effect. Although
post hoc power analyses have critical limitations for
evaluating the statistical power of such tests (Hoenig
and Heisey 2001), confidence intervals around the PI
index (Table 3) not only corroborated results obtained
from the Wilcoxon signed rank test, but also suggested
additional cases (where the confidence limits for PI
values barely overlap zero) of trout effects where the
tests were equivocal (e.g. increased Chironomidae and
Simuliidae, and depleted Heptageniidae). Our data,
therefore, cannot conclusively identify the full suite of
taxa affected by trout introductions, but instead
highlight the largest and most consistent differences
associated with trout presence versus absence.
Consistent increases or decreases in the densities of
10 uncommon invertebrate taxa also were observed
(Table 4). Because we collected limited numbers of
individuals of these taxa (range of 7ñ139 total individuals
for each of these taxa) in less than half of the
stream pairs, the reliability of density estimates was
poor and the power of statistical tests was very low, so
we did not conduct statistical tests on these taxa. The
dobsonfly Dysmicohermes ingens, the cranefly Hesperoconopa,
the two Dytiscidae beetle genera with the
largest body sizes, Agabus and Agabinus, and the water
boatman Graptocorixa californica were all found only in
fishless streams (4ñ6 streams), and the mayfly Attenella
delantala, the stonefly Moselia infuscata, and the
cased caddisfly Neophylax were found almost entirely
in fishless streams, with these results being generally
corroborated by the analyses of PI values and their
associated confidence intervals (Table 4). We note,
too, that two other species in the water boatman
family Corixidae, Cenocorixa wileyae and Hesperocorixa
sp., were found in only one fishless stream each. In
contrast, the caddisfly Glossosoma was found almost
exclusively in trout streams. Finally, we collected the
large siphlonurid mayfly, Edmundsius agilis, from only
two fishless streams. A detailed study of the distribution
of this mayfly showed that this endemic
species is currently confined to a limited number of
fishless headwater streams in the Sierra Nevada and is
almost never found with trout (Silldorff, 2003). Hence,
the distribution and abundance patterns of these other
uncommon invertebrates may also indicate relationships
with trout distributions.
Although we found relationships between trout
presence and the densities of the taxa noted above,
most of the common taxa showed no density differences
between fishless and trout streams (Table 3).
Among other abundant invertebrates, the Baetis-group
mayflies, the mayflies Serratella and Caudatella, the
predatory stonefly Calineuria californica (family Perlidae),
the predatory stonefly family Perlodidae (mostly
Isoperla and Cultus), the shredder stonefly families
Nemouridae (mostly Zapada) and Capniidae, the
predatory caddisfly genus Rhyacophila (pooled species
groups), the grazing caddisfly Micrasema, the dipterans
Bezzia, Hexatoma, Chelifera, and Dicranota, oligochaetes,
and water mites (Acari) all showed no
differences in density or frequency of occurrence
between fishless and trout streams.
In summary, densities of the grazer and predator
guilds, and of 20% of the common taxa (10 of 50),
were reduced in the presence of trout, whereas the collector guild and one taxon increased in the presence
of trout (Table 3). Two other common taxa
showed suggestive differences in density between
trout and fishless streams (P £ 0.10) but interpretation
of statistical results for many common taxa was
compromised by the low power of statistical tests. In
addition, nine uncommon taxa were absent or much
less abundant in the presence of fish and one
uncommon taxon was found predominately in trout
streams (Table 4).
xdiscussion

We used a paired trout versus fishless stream
sampling design to examine relationships between
non-native trout introductions and the distributions
and abundances of invertebrates and algae in historically
fishless Sierra Nevada streams. We used this
design because we wanted to focus on the large
stream-to-stream scales where introduced species
have impacts on recipient communities and populations,
which encompass the range of environmental
variation (e.g. pools and riffles) found within natural
stream reaches, and which represent the scales of
interest to managers and policy makers. Although
direct inference at these large scales is difficult
because of high stream-to-stream variation and the
difficulty or impossibility of directly manipulating
introduced species, these problems are mitigated by
the matched pair design of this study which greatly
reduced or eliminated the influence of potentially
confounding variables. While there were no differences
in the values of measured physicochemical
variables in trout versus paired fishless streams, it is
possible that an unmeasured variable may have
differed between these stream types; however, we
measured most factors known to influence invertebrate
and algal assemblages, including nutrients,
organic matter, substrata, habitat refuges, riparian
cover, stream size, depth, temperature, water chemistry,
elevation and stream gradient (Allan, 1995;
Giller & Malmqvist, 1998), and found no consistent
differences in the values of these variables between
trout and fishless stream pairs. The results therefore
indicate that non-native trout alter invertebrate community
structure in historically fishless mountain
streams by: (i) reducing the abundances of certain
large and /or epibenthic taxa, (ii) producing an
increase in periphyton standing stock and cover, and
(iii) changing trophic relations by reducing grazers
and large invertebrate predators and increasing
collector-gatherers.Even though we observed large changes in the
distributions and abundances of some stream invertebrate
taxa associated with trout introductions in
Sierra Nevada streams, the densities of total invertebrates
and many common stream invertebrate taxa
were not different between fishless and trout streams,
generally corroborating results reported by other
studies (Allan, 1982; Reice & Edwards, 1986; Reice,
1991; but see Flecker & Townsend, 1994). Although
invertebrate community evenness and diversity indices
were greater in fishless than trout streams, these
results were primarily attributable to the increased
relative abundance of the dominant Chironomidae in
trout streams, with little change in the relative
abundances of the majority of remaining invertebrate
taxa. Though the decrease in richness was small
(<10%), trout streams did contain significantly fewer
taxa than fishless streams (Fig. 2). Across all streams,
154 taxa were collected from fishless sites and 142
from trout sites, with taxa missing from trout streams
largely being conspicuous forms (e.g. Edmundsius,
Dysmicohermes, Agabus, Agabinus, Chyranda, Graptocorixa).
Multivariate analyses showed little difference in
invertebrate community structure between fishless
and trout streams, despite our observation that the
densities of a substantial fraction of common taxa
(20%) showed significant declines in the presence of
trout. Exclusion of the Chironomidae in multivariate
analyses and weighting of these analyses towards taxa
with high relative abundances may explain the lack of
clear multivariate responses to trout because we
found that trout effects were concentrated on large
or epibenthic taxa with low to moderate relative
abundances (see Tables 3 & 4).
Our results, however, did show relationships
between the abundances of different functional feeding
groups and the presence versus absence of trout.
Densities of invertebrate predators were reduced and
collector-gatherers increased in the presence of trout,
similar to results reported by Nystro®m et al. (2003)
and Meissner & Muotka (2006). In addition, we found
1336 D. B. Herbst et al.
 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Freshwater Biology, 54, 1324ñ1342
that grazers were more abundant in fishless than trout
streams, but that shredders were relatively unaffected
by trout presence (but see Nystro®m et al., 2003). The
invertebrate taxa in the grazer functional feeding
guild which were reduced by trout were primarily
large mayfly and active caddisfly grazers, consistent
with the results of other studies (McIntosh, 2002;
Nystro®m et al., 2003).
Although trout can have complex direct and indirect
effects on stream invertebrate assemblages, comparisons
of our results with literature data indicate that
some generalities may emerge. As expected with
visual, size-selective predators, trout reduced or
eliminated many large, active and exposed (i.e.
conspicuous) stream invertebrates, including large,
predatory dytiscid beetles, water boatmen, dobson-
flies, predatory stoneflies, large swimming mayfly
nymphs, large, active caddisflies (e.g. Yphria) and
surface-dwelling dixid larvae (Rosenfeld, 2000; McIntosh,
2002; Meissner & Muotka, 2006). As emphasised
by Meissner & Muotka (2006), the vulnerability of
predatory macroinvertebrates to trout is largely a
function of their exposure, large size, and/or active
habits, rather than their functional feeding group
designation, per se. Nevertheless, an invertebrateís
size, mobility and microdistribution provided only
partial insight into how it responded to trout introductions
because, in this study, some organisms with
similar sizes, microdistributions, mobilities, morphologies
and (presumably) conspicuousness showed
different responses to trout. Although we and others
have found reductions in total invertebrate predators
by trout (Feltmate & Williams, 1991; Harvey, 1993;
Meissner & Muotka, 2006), we found that two abundant
stonefly predators in our study streams (Doroneuria
baumanni, Hesperoperla) declined with trout
introductions, but that the densities of a third, similar,
abundant stonefly predator, Calineuria californica, were
unrelated to trout presence, indicating that large
predatory stoneflies can show individualistic responses
to trout presence. We also found that similar
predaceous dobsonfly species (family Corydalidae)
showed different responses to trout presence, with
Dysmicohermes being found only in fishless streams
and Orohermes being found at similar frequencies and
densities in trout versus fishless streams. Grazers as a
group were significantly less abundant in trout than
fishless streams but we found that pairs of similar
grazers, e.g. small turtle-cased caddisflies (Glossosomatidae:
Anagapetus and Glossosoma), rheophilic caddisflies
with silk-sand cases (Neothremma and
Micrasema) and large pool-dwelling mayflies (families
Ameletidae and Siphlonuridae: Ameletus, Edmundsius
and Siphlonurus), often showed very different responses
to trout presence, with densities of Anagapetus,
Neothremma, Ameletus and Edmundsius decreasing,
Glossosoma increasing, and Micrasema and Siphlonurus
being similar from fishless to trout streams. Because
Siphlonurus can shift its distribution to stream areas
inaccessible to fish (e.g. detached pools with lower
oxygen and higher temperature levels than in the
main channel) whereas Edmundsius agilis is always
found only in well-aerated, cool pools in the main
channel, these behavioural differences may account
for their different associations with trout (Day, 1956;
E. Silldorff, unpubl. data).
Although we found strong declines in Tricladida
flatworm densities from fishless to trout streams, the
mechanisms for this result are unclear. Because
flatworms are large (5ñ20 mm), glide along rock
surfaces, and are found in the drift, with a poor
ability to return to the bottom, they may be vulnerable
to visual predators such as trout (Brittain & Eikeland,
1988; Kolasa, 2001). Alternatively, trout may indirectly
affect flatworms because increased macroalgal abundance
on the upper surfaces of stones in trout streams
may interfere with flatworm locomotion, which is
effected via ciliary gliding on mucus trails, and inhibit
their ability to capture prey (Kolasa, 2001). We also
found that the densities of some caddisfly larvae
(Neothremma, Anagapetus, Yphria californica) were
much lower in trout than fishless streams, but literature
results on trout effects on caddisfly larvae have
been inconsistent (Harvey, 1993; Wootton, Parker &
Power, 1996; Meissner & Muotka, 2006). Speciesspecific
behavioural differences may account for the
different responses of similar taxa to trout as suggested
by Yphriaís tendency to eject from its case when
disturbed, presumably rendering the unprotected
larvae vulnerable to trout predation (Wiggins, 1996).
Many of the taxa that were most reduced by trout
appeared to be taxa that are found primarily in small
high elevation streams in western North America that
originally lacked trout [e.g. Edmundsius agilis, high elevation triclads (Polycelis spp.), Neothremma, Anagapetus,
Cryptochia, Dysmicohermes ingens, others], suggesting
that the absence of an evolutionary history
with trout might render such taxa vulnerable to trout
predation (Evans, 1972, 1984; Stark & Gaufin, 1974;
Baumann & Stark, 1980; Wiggins, Weaver & Unzicker,
1985; Stewart & Stark, 2002; Meyer, 2001). There were
ambiguities in unequivocally assigning taxa to distributional
categories that represented allopatry or
sympatry with original trout distributions, because
of uncertainties in the identity of immature forms,
incomplete taxonomic treatments, the high probability
of undescribed species (e.g. Ameletus spp., J. Zloty,
pers. comm), and inadequate information on the
elevational and geographical ranges of many taxa. As
a consequence, we felt it was premature to quantitatively
compare trout impacts on taxa with different
distributional patterns and that such an analysis must
await more comprehensive information on the larval
and adult taxonomy, phylogenies and distributions of
the collected taxa. However, we surmise that there is a
higher relative risk of extinction for rare taxa which
are apparently eliminated by trout, such as Edmundsius,
Dysmicohermes, Agabus, Agabinus and Chyranda.
Consistent with previous studies, we found apparent
indirect, positive effects of trout on components of the
stream biota. First, algal biomass and macroalgal
cover were greater in the presence versus absence of
trout, consistent with most studies where algal
responses have been examined (e.g. Dahl, 1998; Diehl
et al., 2000; Rosenfeld, 2000; Nystro®m & McIntosh,
2003; Nystro®m et al., 2003). Because densities of the
grazer functional feeding group and component large,
active, or exposed grazer species (Ameletus, Paraleptophlebia,
Neothremma, Anagapetus) were much lower in
trout than in troutless streams, we presume that
increased algal levels in trout compared to fishless
streams were the result of a trophic cascade, whereby
trout reduced the densities and foraging activities of
grazing insects, resulting in increases in algae, the
grazersí food, consistent with the evidence used to
infer trophic cascades in other studies (Shurin et al.,
2002). Although higher algal biomass in arenas or
streams containing versus lacking trout has been
commonly observed, there are cases where trout
appear to have negative indirect effects on algal
biomass (Power, 1990; Wootton & Power, 1993;
McIntosh et al., 2004; Meissner & Muotka, 2006),
presumably because these latter studies deal with
four-level trophic cascades, where trout reduce invertebrate
and small vertebrate predators, and so permit
increases in their grazer prey resulting, ultimately, in
reduced algal biomass. Most studies, however, have
shown increased algal biomass in the presence of
trout even though invertebrate predators were present,
indicating that trout effects on grazer densities
and behaviour which result in algal biomass increases
usually override the effects of four-level cascades in
determining algal biomass (Shurin et al., 2002). In
contrast to algal responses to trout, we found no
relationships between the presence or absence of trout
and shredder abundance or the levels of particulate
organic matter and literature results on trout effects
on shredder and detritus levels are mixed and
inconsistent (Reice, 1991; Konishi, Nakano & Iwata,
2001; Ruetz, Newman & Vondracek, 2002; Nystro®m
et al., 2003, Greig & McIntosh, 2006).
A second type of indirect trout effect involved
increases in the densities of other grazing or collectorgatherer
invertebrate taxa in trout streams, such as the
mayfly Centroptilum, perhaps the Chironomidae midges,
and the caddisfly Glossosoma, which probably
benefited from increases in protective algal cover and
food resource availability. Increases in less vulnerable
grazing taxa with trout additions, particularly increases
in the density of chironomids, also have been
reported from experimental studies (reviewed in
Englund, Sarnelle & Cooper, 1999; survey and metaanalysis
in Meissner & Muotka, 2006). Although troutinduced
reductions in large grazers (e.g. some
caddisflies and mayflies) may have resulted in
increases in algal, and ultimately, small grazer levels,
some of these small grazers may have benefited from
habitat-specific reductions in dominant grazers
induced by trout. For example, densities of the
abundant Baetis-group mayflies (containing Baetis
bicaudatus, Baetis tricaudatus and Diphetor hageni) were
similar in the riffles of fishless versus trout streams
(mean densities in fishless versus trout riffles =
1805 m)2 versus 1678 m)2
; Wilcoxon paired (signed
rank) test, P = 0.37), but their densities in the pools of
trout streams were lower than those in the pools of
fishless streams (mean densities in fishless versus trout
pools = 188 m)2 versus 107 m)2
; P = 0.08, Wilcoxon
paired test). This decrease in the abundance of a confamilial (and likely competitive) mayfly in pools
may have benefited the pool-dwelling mayfly, Centroptilum
[mean densities in fishless versus trout stream
riffles = 0.9 m)2 versus 0.1 m)2 (P = 0.09, Wilcoxon
paired test); mean densities in fishless versus trout
stream pools = 34 m)2 versus 305 m)2 (P = 0.03
Wilcoxon paired test)]. An alternative explanation for
increases in some of these taxa (e.g. Centroptilium,
chironomids) where trout are present is large reductions
in the abundances of dominant invertebrate
predators (the Perlid stoneflies Doroneuria baumanni
and Hesperoperla spp., Tricladida flatworms), resulting
in a release from invertebrate predation pressure on
these prey taxa (Peckarsky, 1985; Lancaster, 1990).
Our results suggest that conservation efforts for native
invertebrates that are vulnerable to loss or reductions
associated with trout stocking should focus on protecting
mid-to-high elevation locations where there
are still fishless streams. After verifying the identities
of taxa that are rare endemic forms or keystone
species for ecological function, managers should also
target streams where trout removals would provide
the greatest benefit for promoting the recovery of
populations of these species. Operationally, these
would be streams where trout removal is possible
and practical, where trout re-invasion can be prevented
by natural trout migration barriers (waterfalls
and steep cascades), and where target invertebrate
populations are present nearby to provide colonisation
sources. In addition, the expansion of fishless
habitat through trout extirpations could benefit nontarget
native taxa and restore the structure and
function of stream communities to their original state.
The effects of trout on ecosystem processes in
headwater Sierra streams were evidenced here by (i)
increased algal biomass and cover, (ii) reduction of
the grazer functional feeding group, (iii) the reduced
density of the large predator guild, especially the most
common perlid stonefly predator (Doroneuria baumanni),
(iv) increased density of collector-gatherers other
than chironomids, and (v) apparent increases in
midges in many stream pairs (chironomids play
dominant roles in the consumption of organic matter
and algae and as prey for invertebrate predators) in
the presence of trout. These alterations suggest that
trout have changed the trophic organisation, and
consequent resource production and transformation
dynamics, of many historically fishless high elevation
Sierra streams (see also Feltmate & Williams, 1991;
Huryn, 1998; McIntosh, 2002).
A major government report, the Sierra Nevada
Ecosystem Project report, recommended that Aquatic
Diversity Management Areas (ADMAs) be established
to conserve aquatic resources in the Sierra
Nevada, based primarily on the presence of rare or
endangered fish and amphibian species and on the
proportions of native fish and amphibian species
making up the vertebrate community (Moyle, Randall
& Yoshiyama, 1996b). This approach does not use
native aquatic invertebrate taxa in identifying ADMA
catchments and so ignores the major contributor to
native aquatic biodiversity in the Sierra Nevada.
Because most of the High Sierra was historically
devoid of fish, and because many amphibian species
are patchily distributed and largely absent from
streams, criteria based only on fish and amphibians
are inappropriate for delineating natural headwater
habitats which maintain a high level of native biodiversity.
We suggest, instead, that invertebrate biodiversity
surveys be used as ADMA criteria, and waters
devoid of fish in the high Sierra be designated for
preservation efforts because they contain a native and,
at least partly, vulnerable endemic fauna. Because
fishless habitat is rare and supports an unaltered
native community, primary criteria for delineating
ADMAs in the High Sierra might include: (i) any
fishless stream reaches and especially those with
contiguous areas of fishless habitat, (ii) fishless locations
with known endemic invertebrate populations,
and (iii) streams with, or near sources with, a high
diversity of native invertebrate species where trout
can be removed effectively because of natural barriers
to trout migration. Because headwater streams,
including intermittent channels, may provide important
refuges for native invertebrates from trout
predation and may harbour rare and/or endemic
species, these small drainages should be the focus of
survey and inventory studies that can be used to
delineate ADMAs.