xabstract




1. The composition and spatiotemporal dynamics of biological communities are influenced by

biotic processes, such as predation and competition, but also by physical disturbances, such as

floods in running waters. However, the interplay of disturbance with predation is still poorly

understood, especially in frequently disturbed streams. Further, different predator species can

affect prey communities in different ways depending on their feeding mode and efficiency.

2. We investigated the individual and combined effects of flood-induced bed disturbance and fish

predation on the benthos for 4 weeks in 18 streamside channels fed by a flood-prone New Zealand

river. Bed movements caused by floods were simulated by tumbling the substratum in half the

channels. Six channels each were stocked with introduced brown trout (Salmo trutta) or native

upland bully (Gobiomorphus breviceps) or had fish excluded. We studied algal biomass and both

invertebrate density and daytime activity on surface stones on several dates after the disturbance,

invertebrate community composition in the substrata of the entire channels on day 28 and leaf

decomposition rates over the 28-day period.

3. Disturbance affected algal biomass and density, richness and activity of surface stone

invertebrates, and overall density and richness of channel invertebrates. Presence or absence of

fish, by contrast, did not influence overall invertebrate standing stocks when subsurface substrata

were included but did affect invertebrate densities on surface stones in 45% of all analysed cases

and invertebrate activity on surface stones in all cases. Leaf decomposition rates were not

influenced at all by the experimental manipulations.

4. Native upland bullies featured more often than exotic brown trout in causing invertebrate

density changes and equally often in causing changes to grazer behaviour. Overall, our results

imply that fish predation can have strong effects on the benthic invertebrate community in

frequently disturbed streams, especially via behavioural changes.

xintroduction




The identification of factors that drive the composition

and spatiotemporal dynamics of biological communities

is a central concern of ecology (Pickett & White, 1985),

including stream ecology (Townsend, 1989). Most running

water ecosystems are affected by floods (Poff &

Ward, 1989; Poff, 1996), and hydrological disturbance can

be viewed as a dominant driver of stream community

composition, functioning and biodiversity (Lepori &

Hjerdt, 2006). Biotic interactions, including competition

(e.g. Kohler & Wiley, 1997) and predation (Englund,

1997; Diehl et al., 2000), can also be important determinants

of stream communities. For example, predatory

fish can influence lower trophic levels of the benthic

community by decreasing densities of invertebrate grazers

through direct consumption or increased prey emigration,

or by reducing the time grazers spend foraging on the substratum surface, thus reducing grazer effi-

ciency (McIntosh & Townsend, 1996). Both effects can

enhance algal biomass through a trophic cascade (Townsend,

2003). The strength of the influence of fish on lower

trophic levels depends on the feeding mode and effi-

ciency of each particular fish species. For instance,

McIntosh & Townsend (1996) found that visually foraging,

exotic brown trout reduced mayfly numbers and

activity more than native New Zealand galaxiid fish

(which use mechanical cues when hunting for prey),

resulting in a stronger trophic cascade for trout.

Biotic interactions can be expected to be important in

stable streams, but Townsend (1989) and Poff & Ward

(1989) predicted that the importance of biotic interactions

should decrease with increasing frequency and severity of

disturbance. On the other hand, Chesson & Huntly (1997)

theorised that biotic interactions may play an important

role even in frequently disturbed ecosystems because a

minor biotically generated stress could be enough to push

a species already weakened by abiotic disturbance ëover

the edgeí. In other words, disturbance may either relieve

organisms from stress caused by biotic interactions or

make them even more vulnerable to this stress (Thomson,

Lake & Downes, 2002). Which of these opposing outcomes

occurs may depend on the particular actors, the impact of

the disturbance on each actor and possibly on further

interacting factors (Thomson et al., 2002).

Despite the wealth of theory and the results of a survey

conducted in a set of Swedish mountain streams spanning

a range of bed disturbance frequencies (Lepori & Malmqvist,

2007, 2009), empirical research to test the abovementioned

predictions in running waters has important

gaps. Few manipulative experiments have investigated

the interplay between abiotic disturbance and biotic

factors in frequently disturbed streams (Pringle & Hamazaki,

1997; Thomson et al., 2002; Herrmann, 2009; Effenberger

et al., 2011), and only the latter two studies

investigated the effect of bed-moving disturbances on

predatorñprey relationships. Further, predators are

known not only to affect their prey by direct consumption

but also to cause changes in prey behaviour (Townsend,

2003), and none of these four experiments assessed effects

of fish predators on invertebrate behaviour.

This experiment investigated effects of fish predators on

lower trophic levels in streamside channels supplied with

water and aquatic organisms from a flood-prone New

Zealand river. We studied the individual and combined

effects of bed disturbance and predation by two fish

species (exotic brown trout, Salmo trutta L., and native

upland bullies, Gobiomorphus breviceps Stokell) on benthic

invertebrate density and daytime activity, epilithic algal

biomass and leaf decomposition rates over a 28-day

period following an experimental disturbance.

We tested three hypotheses: (i) Based on the predictions

of Townsend (1989) and Poff & Ward (1989), physical

disturbance should have a more pervasive effect on

invertebrate distributions and algal biomass accrual than

fish predation because of the frequently disturbed nature

of our study stream (on average one flood every 26 days,

see Methods). (ii) Fish presence should reduce both

invertebrate density and daytime activity, possibly resulting

in a trophic cascade and an increase in algal biomass;

moreover, a trophic cascade might be stronger for the

voracious trout than for the native bullies (as noted for

native galaxiid fish; Townsend, 2003) because, on an

evolutionary timescale, New Zealand stream invertebrates

have been exposed to trout predators only since

the late nineteenth century. (iii) Because of greater

exposure to fish predation, invertebrate activity and

density of invertebrates on surface stones should respond

more strongly to fish presence than whole-channel invertebrate

density (which includes large numbers in subsurface

locations).

xmethods


Our experiment was conducted from 8 March to 2 May

2007 (Austral autumn) in streamside channels located in

the floodplain of the Kauru River, a third-order stream in

the South Island of New Zealand (17044.6ë East, 456.5ë

South, 98 m a.s.l.). The river has a gravel / cobble bed, with

substratum particles in a 30-m reach near the stream

channel site having a b-diameter (second longest axis) of

10.3 ± 5.8 cm (mean ± standard error [SE]; pebble counts

after Wolman, 1954 on 19 April 2006, n = 100).

Mean annual river discharge 400 m upstream of our

channel site is 1.29 m3 s

)1 (Otago Regional Council,

unpubl. data). Field observations from 2005 to 2008

showed that floods exceeding about 30 m3 s

)1 cause

major bed movements, including changes in the course

of the active channel, deposition of new gravel bars and

the creation of scour pools, in the 200-m river section

where the channels were located. Such floods occurred 13

times in the 99 months for which flow data were available

(November 1991 to June 1994, September 2003 to March

2009). According to Clausen & Biggs (1997), spates

exceeding three times the annual median flow generally

disturb the benthic algal and invertebrate community of

New Zealand streams. For our Kauru River site, 13.8 such

events occurred per year based on the available flow data,


with a mean interval between events of 26 days (which is

similar to our 28-day post-disturbance experimental

period) and a maximum of 107 days.

In spite of its harsh disturbance regime, the Kauru River

contains a diverse and abundant invertebrate and algal

community (Herrmann, 2009; Lange et al., 2011). Fish

populations in a 30-m reach about 100 m upstream of the

channel site on 5 December 2005 included 88 brown trout

(0.29 individuals m)2

), 83 upland bullies (0.28 m)2

), 11

eels (Anguilla dieffenbachii Gray and A. australis Richardson)

and one Galaxias vulgaris Stokell (calculated using the

software Microfish 3.0 and based on three electric fishing

runs; EFM300 electric fishing machine, NIWA Instrument

Systems, Christchurch, New Zealand). These values are

in the mid-range of the natural densities of brown trout

(McIntosh, 2000: 0.01ñ0.5 m)2

; Townsend, 2003: 0.1ñ

0.4 m)2

) and upland bullies (McIntosh, 2000: 0.01ñ0.07

individuals m)2

; Jowett & Boustead, 2001: 0.01ñ2.8 m)2

) in

New Zealand streams.Our experimental set-up consisted of 18 steel sheet channels

(2.5 ∑ 0.15 ∑ 0.15 m) that were installed on a flat

gravel area between two river arms. Channels were

assigned to two disturbance categories crossed with three

fish predator treatments in a full-factorial, randomized

block design, with each treatment combination represented

once in a block of six neighbouring channels and

three replicates of each treatment combination. The experiment

started with a 27-day colonisation phase followed by

a 28-day manipulative phase. Half the channels were

subjected to a single disturbance at the start of the

manipulative phase; the other half served as undisturbed

controls. Predator treatments (maintained over the entire

manipulation period) included channels with exotic trout,

channels with native bullies and fishless controls.

River water was supplied to triplets of adjacent channels

through six PVC drainage pipes (inner diameter

14 cm; Humes Pipeline Systems, Dunedin, New Zealand)

from a run about 50 m upstream of the set-up. A metal

box (0.49 ∑ 0.20 ∑ 0.17 m) distributed the water from each

pipe into the three channels. Each experimental block

consisted of two such channel triplets, with 0.4 m between

blocks. Adjustable weirs at the channel inflows and

outflows allowed flow and water depth to be equalised

across all channels (velocity 8.3 ± 0.3 cm s)1 [SE]; depth

5.8 ± 0.1 cm; measured at three surface stones sampled

for invertebrates per channel on days 0, 14 and 28,

n = 162). Overall, current velocity in the channels was

similar across disturbance treatments (P = 0.43) and fish

treatments (P = 0.24) and showed no fish ∑ disturbance

interaction (P = 0.83; nested repeated-measures ANOVA

with the same model as for surface stone invertebrate

densities, see Statistical Analysis). Discharges per channel

(overall mean 871 ± 26 mL s)1 [SE]; measured twice daily

on days 14, 20 and 25, n = 108) were also similar across

disturbance (P = 0.10) and fish treatments (P = 0.16;

interaction P = 0.42). Consequently, levels of colonisation

by drifting algae and invertebrates can be expected to

have been similar across disturbance and fish treatments.

To prevent fish from escaping, channels were equipped

at both ends with stainless steel, wire mesh screens (mesh

size 6 mm). Before adding fish, all channels were covered

with nylon net (mesh size 10 mm). Because of the

relatively coarse mesh sizes, neither the screens nor the

nets restricted movements of stream invertebrates in and

out of the channels. To keep drifting debris from clogging

the channel inflow screens, the intake of each water

supply pipe was equipped with a conical net (mesh size

15 mm, diameter 15 cm, length 150 cm). In addition, a 4-

m wire mesh fence (mesh size 10 mm) was erected

perpendicular to the current 3 m upstream of the pipe

intakes. This fence, the conical nets and the inflow screens

were cleaned every 3 days.

At the start of the colonisation phase, channels were

filled with river substratum. To create a surface layer

similar to the mean surface substratum size in the river,

rocks with a b-diameter of about 9 cm were taken from

near the supply pipe inflows and placed on top of a 2-to 3-

cm-deep layer of dry, medium-to-coarse gravels taken

from the flood plain. Pebble counts of 25 randomly

selected surface stones (which included several smaller

particles) per channel showed that mean surface grain

size (6.9 ± 0.1 cm [SE]; n = 450) was similar across treatments

(see Fig. 1a, Table 1a). Channels were then colonised

naturally for 25 days by drifting algae and

invertebrates.

Two days before the start of the manipulations, river

invertebrates were seeded into the channels to augment

natural colonisation. Each channel received one standard

load of invertebrates and particulate organic matter

obtained by kick-net sampling (frame 60 ∑ 40 cm; mesh

size 200 lm) from a 100-m riffleñrun section whose upper

boundary was near the supply pipe inflows. Starting from

downstream, 18 bed patches (area roughly equivalent to

the channel surface area of 0.38 m2

) of similar current

velocity and water depth were sampled for 3 min each.

Samples were randomly assigned to channels, and one

sample was released into each channel (while blocking the

inflow to ensure that all invertebrates settled out onto the

substratum).Comparisons of invertebrate community composition

on surface stones in our stream channels with communities

colonising tile substrata during two studies in the

Kauru River (Herrmann, 2009) indicated that our experimental

colonisation regime did not lead to a consistent

under-representation of crawling taxa, which might be

less prone to drifting, in the channels compared with the

invertebrate communities in the nearby river. Further,

densities of all common crawling taxa tended to increase

with time in disturbed channels during the manipulative

phase, implying that the majority of individuals belonging

to these taxa chose to stay in our channels following

invertebrate seeding and that their numbers were supplemented

by further individuals entering the channels

via the supply pipes. Consequently, we believe that the

experimental set-up combined with the seeding procedure

resulted in realistic invertebrate colonisation dynamics

during the experiment.At the start of the manipulative phase (day 0), the

substratum inside each disturbed channel was tumbled

vigorously by hand for three minutes, beginning at the

upstream end and proceeding downstream to ensure that

all dislodged organisms and organic material left the

channels. The other nine (control) channels were left

undisturbed.

Immediately after disturbance, we added four bullies

(10.7 individuals m)2

) to each bully channel and two trout

to each trout channel (5.3 m)2

) after capturing by electro-

fishing and selecting individuals to provide similar biomasses

in the two treatments (Fig. 1b). All fish survived the

experiment and were weighed again on day 28 before

release. Trout numbers were chosen to achieve densities

comparable with those in previous stream channel experiments

where fish presence affected invertebrate behaviour

(Flecker & Townsend, 1994: 4.2 m)2

; McIntosh & Townsend,

1996: 3.8 and 4.3 m)2

). Consequently, fish densities

inside our channels were higher than in the Kauru River.On three occasions (2ñ4 h, 14 and 28 days after the

disturbance and fish addition), three randomly selected surface stones per channel (one each from the upper,

middle and lower thirds) were collected to investigate

invertebrates and algae on the bed surface. Stones were

sampled by holding a hand net (mesh size 250 lm)

directly downstream, lifting the stone quickly into the net

and transferring stones and invertebrates into sealable

plastic bags. We then measured water depth (with a ruler)

and current velocity 3 cm above the bed (with an electromagnetic

flow meter; Flo-Mate 2000, Marsh McBirney - A

Hach Company Brand, Hach Company, Loveland, CO,

U.S.A.) in all locations where stones had been collected.

We used 10 g (fresh weight) of leaves of mahoe

(Melicytus ramiflorus Forster), a common native shrub that

decomposes fairly rapidly, as a decomposition bioassay

for comparisons between treatments (see Matthaei, Piggott

& Townsend, 2010). All leaves in each pack (10ñ15)

were bolted together near their base using stainless steel

bolts, nuts and washers. One leaf pack per channel third

was held in place on the bed by rocks. Leaf packs were

sampled on day 28, in a similar way to surface stones but

without catching associated invertebrates. Stone samples

and leaf packs were stored on ice in the dark, frozen in the

laboratory on the day of sampling and stored at )18 C

until processing.

To sample the invertebrate community in the whole

channels on day 28 (after surface stones and leaf packs

had been collected), the bed of each channel was stirred

vigorously for 3 min with a broom handle, again starting

at the upstream end and proceeding downstream. All

dislodged invertebrates were caught in a net at the

downstream end (mesh size 250 lm) and immediately

preserved in 70% ethanol.

On days 14, 18, 20, 25 and 27, filamentous algal cover on

surface rocks and invertebrate presence on the upper

surfaces of the same rocks were assessed visually during

daytime. Six rocks per channel were selected randomly

and their positions marked on the channel walls. Algal

cover on each stone was estimated visually (by one

person, in increments of 5% cover), and any invertebrates

seen on the upper stone surface were recorded. Because

these invertebrates were almost exclusively grazers, we

assumed that their presence on the upper stone surfaces

indicated they were feeding on periphyton. Consequently,

their presence was seen as a proxy of invertebrate (grazer)

activity (see also McIntosh & Townsend, 1996).Invertebrates and loose filamentous algae were washed

gently from each surface rock after thawing, retrieved in

a 200-lm sieve and stored in 70% ethanol until further

processing. Epilithic algae were then scrubbed off the

upper surface of each stone using a toothbrush with

shortened bristles. The algal suspension was washed into

a measuring cylinder and filled to 100 mL with tap

water. An aliquot of 25ñ50 mL (depending on the

concentration of the suspension) was filtered onto a glass

fibre filter (GC-50; Toyo Roshi Kaisha Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).

Algal biomass was determined as chlorophyll a (lg m)2

)

using standard procedures (Biggs & Kilroy, 2000) and a

UVñVIS spectrophotometer (UV mini 1240; Shimadzu,

Kyoto, Japan).

Leaf packs were defrosted and cleansed of loosely

attached algae and invertebrates. Remaining leaf biomass

in each pack was determined as ash-free dry mass using

standard methods (APHA, 1998) and compared with the

averaged ash-free dry mass of 10 similar leaf packs that

had been weighed and processed before the start of the

experiment. Leaf biomass loss was then expressed as per

cent of initial mass.

Invertebrates in stone and channel samples were identified

to the lowest practical taxonomic level (usually

genus or family) under a dissecting microscope (Olympus

SZ51, 8ñ40∑, Tokyo, Japan). Because of large invertebrate

numbers in the whole-channel samples, these were

divided into eight subsamples using a rotating subsampler.

One of these subsamples was then scanned for rare

invertebrate taxa. These were removed, and a quarter of

the remainder of the subsample was scanned for complete

counts of common taxa (thus, 1 /32 of the common

invertebrates in each channel sample were counted).All analyses were conducted in SPSS version 18.0 (SPSS:

an IBM company, Armonk, NY, U.S.A.). Response variables

were log10-transformed where necessary to improve

normality and homoscedasticity. To assess the homogeneity

of invertebrate seeding and the initial impact of the

disturbance, we compared algal biomass, total invertebrate

density, taxon richness and densities of the eight

most common taxa on surface rocks on day 0 between our

treatments. For the first three response variables, these

comparisons were performed using nested, four-way

analyses of variance (ANOVA), with the factors fish,

disturbance, block (random factor without interaction

term) and sample number (1ñ3; nested within fish and

disturbance). The model of this ANOVA was intercept (d.f.

1) + disturbance (1) + fish (2) + disturbance ∑ fish (2)

+ block (2) + sample(disturbance) (2) + sample(fish) (6)

+ error (38; n = 54). Effects on community composition

(based on log-transformed densities of the common taxa)were analysed with the multivariate equivalent of this

model, and treatment effects were explored further by

investigating univariate between-subjects effects in the MANOVA

for each common taxon. We used the type I

(sequential) sums of squares, the appropriate method for

analysing this type of nested design in SPSS (Field, 2005).

Leaf mass loss across the whole 28-day manipulative

period was analysed with the same ANOVA model.

Algal biomass, total invertebrate density and taxon

richness on surface rocks, as well as visually determined

algal cover and total invertebrate activity, were analysed

using nested repeated-measures ANOVAs (with the

repeated-measures equivalent of the model given earlier).

As mentioned earlier, effects on community composition

(based on densities of the eight most common taxa on

rocks or numbers of the three taxa most frequently seen

on the upper rock surfaces, respectively) were analysed

with the multivariate equivalent of the model. Fish,

disturbance, block and sample (1ñ3 for sampled surface

rocks and 1ñ6 for visual observations, nested within fish

and disturbance) were the between-subjects factors in these

ANOVAs, and time (sampling occasion or observation,

respectively) was the within-subjects factor. Fish biomass

on days 0 and 28 was analysed using a three-way

repeated-measures ANOVA with the between-subjects factors

disturbance, fish and block. In cases where the

assumption of sphericity (examined with Mauchlyís tests)

was violated, the results of the within-subjects analysis

were corrected using the GreenhouseñGeisser method

(Quinn & Keough, 2002). We also conducted ërepeatedí

specific contrasts, which compared each sampling occasion

with the subsequent one, to determine changes in

factor effects and interactions with time.

Total density, taxon richness and densities of the 11

most common invertebrate taxa in the entire substratum

of each channel on day 28 (including all animals found on

the three surface stones sampled on this day) were

analysed with three-way ANOVAs (factors fish, disturbance

and block). The model of this ANOVA was intercept

(d.f. 1) + disturbance (1) + fish (2) + disturbance ∑ fish

(2) + block (2) + error (10; n = 18).

If a between-subjects effect of the factor fish was significant

in these analyses, we conducted pairwise post hoc

comparisons using Tukeyís HSD tests. For the sake of

brevity, the results for the block factor and the nested

factor sample are not presented. Although these factors

accounted for a certain amount of background variation

and thus improved overall predictive power of our

models, their effects were not relevant to our research

objectives. All presented results were significant

(P < 0.050) unless stated otherwise.


xresults




Fish biomass did not change from day 0 to day 28 of the

experiment (Fig. 1b; Table 1b). However, a fish by

disturbance interaction in the between-subjects effects

indicated that trout biomass in stable channels was

somewhat greater than in disturbed channels, whereas

bullies showed the opposite pattern Surface rocks were dominated by Chironomidae (37.9%

of total invertebrate density; all rock samples combined)

and the caddisfly Pycnocentrodes spp. (36.1%). The mayfly

genera Deleatidium and Zephlebia were combined as

Leptophlebiidae because it was impossible to identify

small individuals reliably (the former contributed 95.8%

and the latter 4.2% to identifiable individuals larger than

6 mm). Leptophlebiidae contributed 7.1% to total density.

Cladocera (6.6%), the caddisfly Oxyethira spp. (3.7%), the

snail Potamopyrgus antipodarum Gray (3.6%), Copepoda

(2.0%) and the caddis family Hydrobiosidae (1.4%) were

also common enough to be analysed individually.

Together, these eight taxa represented 98.4% of all

individuals in rock samples.

A few hours after disturbance and fish addition on day

0, algal biomass on surface rocks was similar across

disturbance and fish treatments overall (Fig. 2a; Table 2).

Total invertebrate density, taxon richness and densities of

all common taxa were reduced in disturbed channels

compared with stable channels, and disturbance also

affected invertebrate community composition (Table 2;

Figs 2a & 3). By contrast, only one significant difference

between fish treatments occurred, with Hydrobiosidae

being less abundant in the presence of trout than in the

absence of fish. The effects of fish and disturbance

interacted in three cases: the impact of fish presence on

total invertebrate density and densities of Leptophlebiidae

and Hydrobiosidae appeared to be stronger in stable than

in disturbed channels. However, these interactions probably

represent statistical artefacts because values for all

three variables were generally low in disturbed channels,

so marked differences between fish treatments were only

possible in stable channels.

Repeated-measures ANOVAs on surface stone data

showed that algal biomass increased from day 0 to day

14 and day 14 to day 28 (Fig. 2a; Table 3). Averaged across

the three dates, biomass was higher in channels with

bullies than in the absence of fish. The same overall pattern

was found for total invertebrate density, which was also higher in stable channels than in disturbed ones. Total

density and taxon richness both increased with time, and

richness was also higher in stable than in disturbed

channels. Significant time by disturbance contrasts

showed that the difference between disturbed and control

channels became smaller for both invertebrate variables

from day 0 to day 14. Further, the overall effects of fish and

disturbance on total density and richness interacted. In

disturbed channels, values for both variables were generally

lower in fishless channels than in bully or trout

channels, whereas in stable channels, total density showed

no consistent pattern, and richness was as high, or even

higher, in fishless channels than in those containing fish.

Chironomidae (Fig. 3) decreased from day 0 to day 14

and were more common in channels containing bullies

than in channels without fish (Table 3). Overall, stable

channels also held more Chironomidae than disturbed

channels, a difference that diminished from day 0 to day

14 but increased again from day 14 to day 28. Leptophlebiidae

were more abundant when fish were absent than in

the presence of bullies, and also in stable channels than in

disturbed ones. The effects of fish and disturbance on

Leptophlebiidae interacted; the negative effect of fish was

stronger in stable than in disturbed channels. Significant

specific contrasts indicated that Leptophlebiidae densities

increased generally with time and that negative effects of

both fish and disturbance on this taxon grew stronger

from day 14 to day 28. Potamopyrgus antipodarum was

more abundant in channels with bullies than in the

absence of fish and in stable channels than in disturbed

ones. Density patterns of this taxon remained similar

across time.

Pycnocentrodes, Oxyethira and Cladocera were all more

abundant in stable channels than in disturbed ones (Fig. 3;Table 3). All these negative effects of disturbance weakened

from day 0 to day 14, as indicated by significant specific

contrasts. The negative effect of disturbance on Hydrobiosidae

also weakened from day 0 to day 14, even though the

overall effect of disturbance on this taxon was not significant,

implying that it recovered quickly from the perturbation.

Effects of fish and disturbance on Pycnocentrodes

and Hydrobiosidae interacted overall (Pycnocentrodes:

P = 0.052, power = 0.58, Hydrobiosidae: P = 0.054,

power = 0.57). In disturbed treatments, Pycnocentrodes

densities were lowest in the fishless channels on all three

sampling dates, whereas in stable treatments, densities

in the fishless channels were exceeded by densities in

channels containing bullies on day 28 only. Hydrobiosidae

in disturbed channels were generally less common in the

absence of fish than in the presence of trout, while in stable

channels, the opposite pattern occurred on day 14 and

especially on day 0. Although the effect of fish on Pycnocentrodes

was not significant overall, this effect changed

from day 14 to day 28, with Pycnocentrodes density increasing

in channels with bullies while decreasing in channels

without fish. The interactive effects of fish and disturbance

on Oxyethira and Cladocera changed from day 0 to day 14,

with densities of both taxa increasing more in disturbed

channels with trout than elsewhere. Densities of Copepoda

and Cladocera generally increased from day 14 to day 28.Total invertebrate density in whole-channel samples

reached almost 50 000 individuals m)2 (Fig. 2b). The

channel fauna was dominated by Leptophlebiidae,

which contributed 21.1% to total density (averaged

across all channels). Further dominant invertebrates

were Chironomidae (17.3% of total density), Oligochaeta

(14.6%), Copepoda (14.6%) and Cladocera (9.7%).

Potamopyrgus antipodarum contributed 8.1% to total

density and larval coleopterans (Hydora spp.) 1.9%.

The caddisfly genera Olinga spp. and Pycnocentria spp.

were combined into one taxon because the subsampling

of the channel samples made it impossible to relate

individuals that lost their case to empty cases, which is

essential for reliably distinguishing between the two

genera (Olinga contributed 98.3% and Pycnocentria 1.7%

of individuals, based on individuals that had retained

their cases). Together, the two taxa comprised 3.3% of

the total invertebrate density. The three caddis taxa

Hydrobiosidae (3.2% of total density), Pycnocentrodes

spp. (2.6%) and Oxyethira spp. (1.5%) were also relatively

abundant. These 11 taxa contributed 98.0% of all

invertebrates in the channel samples and were analysed

individually.

Both total invertebrate density and taxon richness

were higher in stable channels 28 days after the

disturbance (Fig. 2b; Table 4). The effects of fish and

disturbance on taxon richness interacted; in stable

channels, richness was highest in the presence of

bullies, whereas it was highest in the absence of fish

in disturbed channels. Five of the common channel

taxa were still affected by the disturbance on day 28

(Fig. 4; Table 4). Densities of Leptophlebiidae, Chironomidae,

larval Coleoptera and Hydrobiosidae were all

lower in disturbed channels. Copepoda, on the other

hand, were more abundant in disturbed channels (P = 0.055, power = 0.50). None of the common taxa

showed an effect of fish presence or an interactive effect

of fish and disturbance.

Leaf decomposition rates across the 28-day manipulative

period were not influenced at all by the experimental

manipulations (fish: P = 0.93, disturbance: P = 0.11,

fish ∑ disturbance: P = 0.34; Fig. 2b).Averaged across the five observations from day 14 to day

27, visually determined cover of surface stones by

filamentous algae was lower in the presence of bullies

than in the presence of trout (Fig. 5; Table 5). This pattern

was more pronounced and consistent in disturbed than in stable channels, as indicated by a fish by disturbance

interaction. Algal cover increased across time with each

subsequent observation, and the influence of fish on cover

changed with each subsequent observation after day 18.

Algal cover increased most in fishless channels from day

18 to day 20, most in bully channels from day 20 to day 25

and most in trout channels from day 25 to day 27. From

day 18 to day 20, the negative effect of disturbance on

algal cover diminished and the shape of the fish by

disturbance interaction changed. The latter change was

probably due to a strong increase in algal cover in stable

channels lacking fish, combined with a slight decrease in

stable channels with trout.

Overall, the total number of invertebrates observed on

the upper surfaces of the monitored rocks was higher in

the presence of bullies than in the absence of fish and in

stable channels than in disturbed ones (Fig. 5; Table 5).

The effects of fish and disturbance on total invertebrates

observed interacted; in stable channels, the highest numbers

were consistently seen in channels containing bullies,

whereas in the disturbed channels this pattern was far less

pronounced and only seen on days 18, 20 and 27. The number of observed invertebrates generally increased

from days 14 to 18 and 18 to 20 but decreased from days

20 to 25. The negative effect of disturbance on observed

numbers of invertebrates grew stronger from day 18 to

day 20.

The observational data for the dominant invertebrate

taxa on surface rocks (the grazers Conoesucidae, Leptophlebiidae

and P. antipodarum; 99.4% of all invertebrates

observed) were analysed individually. In this context, the

caddis taxon Conoesucidae was analysed as a family

because it was impossible to distinguish between the

genera Pycnocentrodes, Olinga and Pycnocentria. Overall,

Conoesucidae were seen more often on rock surfaces in

the presence of bullies than in the absence of fish and

more often in stable than in disturbed channels (Fig. 5;

Table 5). The effects of fish and disturbance on observed

Conoesucidae interacted, closely resembling the patterns

for total invertebrates observed. Additionally, fluctuating

numbers of Conoesucidae observed in stable channels

caused their overall density and the negative effect of

disturbance on this taxon to strengthen from days 18 to 20

and to diminish from days 20 to 25 (time ∑ disturbance:

P = 0.058, power = 0.48). Potamopyrgus antipodarum was

observed more often when bullies or trout were present

than in the absence of fish, and also from day 14 to day 18.

Leptophlebiidae responded differently to the fish treatments

than the other dominant grazers (Fig. 5; Table 5).

Overall, individuals of this taxon were seen more often in

the absence of fish and in stable channels. Further, the

negative impact of fish on Leptophlebiidae was stronger

in stable than in disturbed channels. From days 14 to 18,

numbers of this taxon also appeared to change strongly

with time as indicated by four significant pairwise

contrasts. However, because no Leptophlebiidae at all

were observed on day 14 (Fig. 5), these results are

statistical artefacts without biological meaning.

xdiscussion

In our study, bed disturbance had a pervasive effect on

the benthic community, affecting algal biomass and

density, taxonomic richness and daytime activity of

invertebrates on surface stones, as well as density and

richness of invertebrates in the entire substratum of the

experimental stream channels. Presence of fish predators,

in contrast, did not influence overall invertebrate standing

stocks when subsurface substrata were included, but it

did affect invertebrate density, and especially invertebrate

activity, on surface stones.

The study of predation effects in animal communities

dominated by highly mobile organisms is challenging,

and it is important to be aware of the strengths and

weaknesses of the chosen study design (e.g. Cooper,

Walde & Peckarsky, 1990; Englund, 1997; Diehl et al.,

2000; Effenberger et al., 2011). Our experiment has several

strengths, including (i) disturbance and fish predation

were manipulated in reasonably large streamside channels

that allowed natural migration rates of invertebrate

prey, (ii) sampling was performed at two spatial scales

(individual surface stones versus whole-channel substrata)

(Englund, 1997) and included invertebrate standing

stocks (based on preserved samples) as well as field observations of living invertebrates, (iii) the nested factorial

design permitted accounting for within-channel

background variation, thus improving overall statistical

power, and (iv) biological response variables included

both structural (algal biomass, invertebrate densities) and

functional (leaf decomposition) parameters, allowing disturbance

and predation effects to be evaluated within a

broader food-web perspective.

Nevertheless, at the spatial scale of streamside channels

such as ours, a closed experimental system (without prey

migration) or repeated estimates of prey consumption by

fish (a logistical impossibility in our case) would be best

suited to quantify population-level effects on prey of fish

predation (via direct mortality) (Englund, 1997). While

our open experimental system is more suitable to determine

realistic local effects of predation (Cooper et al.,

1990; Englund, 1997) because invertebrate drift is a key

feature of running water ecosystems, note that these local

effects include both direct mortality because of fish

consumption and indirect effects because of prey emigration

that our study could not differentiate. Similarly, we

could not distinguish between mortality and emigration by drift when evaluating the short-term effects of our

experimental disturbance.Shortly after our experimental disturbance, total invertebrate

density, taxon richness and densities of all common

individual taxa on surface rocks were significantly

reduced in the disturbed treatments. Tumbling of the

channel substrata clearly represented a strong disturbance

for the invertebrates. Surprisingly, the mobile,

predatory caddis Hydrobiosidae was more abundant on

surface stones in fishless channels than in trout channels

only a few hours after the addition of fish. This pattern

may represent a fast reaction to high predation risk in

the trout channels. As the experiment proceeded, the

influence of disturbance on invertebrate richness, densities

and community composition continued to dominate

in the whole-channel samples but less so in surface stone samples. Overall, therefore, disturbance effects were

more pronounced than fish effects, as predicted for the

community of a highly disturbed river (Poff & Ward,

1989; Townsend, 1989) and supporting our first hypothesis.

Our analysis also showed that the effects of fish on

invertebrates on surface rocks tended to grow stronger

towards the end of the experiment, whereas most effects

of disturbance on the invertebrates diminished with time.

These changes conform to a patch dynamics view of

streams (Townsend, 1989) where the successional state of

individual bed patches differs according to their local

disturbance history (Matthaei & Townsend, 2000).

Fish predation and disturbance effects interacted in

several cases. Leptophlebiid density on surface rocks and

the numbers of Leptophlebiidae and Conoesucidae

observed on these rocks during daytime all showed

stronger impacts of fish presence in stable channels than

in disturbed ones. On the other hand, invertebrate taxon

richness in the whole-channel samples, taxon richness and

total density on surface rocks as well as visually determined

algal cover all showed interaction patterns with

disturbance that allowed no straightforward ranking of

fish impacts in stable and disturbed channels. Consequently,

the combined results of our experiment indicate

that additional, unknown factors are likely to influence

the interplay between disturbance and predation (see also

Thomson et al., 2002).Algal biomass on surface rocks was lower in the absence

of fish in our experiment, as would be expected if the

predatory fish had reduced grazer density and allowed

algal biomass to accrue (McIntosh & Townsend, 1996;

Townsend, 2003). Paradoxically, however, total density of

invertebrates and of the grazing snail P. antipodarum on

surface rocks were generally lowest in fishless channels.

On the other hand, grazing leptophlebiid mayflies were

more common in fishless channels. The same patterns

were even more prominent for invertebrate activity: total

invertebrates and the abundant grazers Conoesucidae and

P. antipodarum were observed more often on surface rocks during daytime in channels containing fish, whereas

Leptophlebiidae were more active in the absence of fish.

Therefore, the presence of fish may have influenced

competitive interactions among grazers, possibly because

of differences in their vulnerability to fish predation: nonarmoured

leptophlebiid mayflies were far more abundant

and active in fishless channels, whereas case-bearing

conoesucid caddis flies and the shelled snail P. antipodarum

were more abundant and active in the presence of

fish. Most of the snails on surface rocks were much

smaller (length 2 mm or less) than the mayflies (length

typically 3 mm or more) (P.B. Herrmann, unpubl. data),

and it is possible that the larger mayflies were more

efficient grazers (Holomuzki & Biggs, 2006). Consequently,

their replacement by other taxa may have been

responsible for enhanced algal biomass accrual, and thus

a trophic cascade, in the presence of fish.

In previous studies of introduced exotic brown trout

and fish species native to New Zealand, trophic cascades

were more evident for the voracious, visually hunting

brown trout than for the native galaxiids Galaxias depressiceps

and G. eldoni (Townsend, 2003). This difference

occurred because trout caused not only a more marked

reduction in grazer density than the galaxiids, but also

resulted in markedly reduced grazing activity during

daylight hours, when grazers were particularly vulnerable

to trout predation. In contrast, in the current experiment,

native bullies featured more often than introduced trout

in causing density changes in their invertebrate prey,

while trout and bullies were equally influential in their

effects on invertebrate behaviour. It may be that upland

bullies pose greater predation risks to stream invertebrates

than the previously studied galaxiids.

Another explanation for the stronger impact of bullies

on invertebrate density compared with that of trout could

be the higher bully density, which resulted from standardising

predation pressure by fish biomass. The strength of

non-lethal predator effects may depend more strongly on

prey encounter rates, which are linked to densities of both

prey and predators (e.g. Walton, 1980) than on predator

biomass. Therefore, the reduced invertebrate density in

bully channels could have been at least partly a result of

increased invertebrate drift rates as a predator avoidance

behaviour and thus higher prey emigration from these

channels compared with channels containing trout or no

fish (Walton, 1980; Thomson et al., 2002).

Predatory fish might also affect leaf decomposition via a

trophic cascade if two conditions are satisfied. First, fish

must reduce the density or feeding activity of invertebrates

that help consume leaf material. Second, invertebrate

feeding must be an important factor in leaf

decomposition in comparison with the microbial processes

that often dominate. In our experiment, neither

presence of fish nor disturbance affected leaf mass loss.

Consequently, it is likely that bacteria and fungi are

mainly responsible for organic matter decomposition in

this grassland river, as they are in many other New

Zealand streams and rivers (Winterbourn, Rounick &

Cowie, 1981).At the end of our experiment, invertebrates in wholechannel

samples were completely unaffected by fish

presence (no significant main effects on total density,

taxon richness, community composition or densities of

common taxa), whereas stable channels differed from

disturbed ones in half these cases (Table 6). By comparison,

invertebrates on surface rocks were influenced by

fish presence in 45% of all analysed cases and by

disturbance in 82% of cases. Finally, daytime invertebrate

activity on surface rocks was affected by the fish

treatments in all cases analysed and by disturbance in

just 80% of these cases. The respective effect frequencies

for fish ∑ disturbance interactions were 7% for whole

channels, 27% for density and 60% for activity on

surface stones. These comparisons imply that fish

presence was a strong determinant of invertebrate density and, even more markedly, daytime activity on

surface rocks but had little effect on overall invertebrate

standing stocks (which included all subsurface channel

substrata). Disturbance, on the other hand, strongly

affected invertebrate density in both surface and subsurface

substrata, reducing the densities of all common

taxa except Copepoda. These results support our final

hypothesis that, because of exposure to predation risk at

the bed surface during daylight hours, invertebrate

activity and density on surface stones should respond

more strongly to fish presence than whole-channel

invertebrate density.

Nevertheless, it is worth noting that our experimental

fish densities were quite high compared with those in

most New Zealand streams and that we did not monitor

invertebrate behaviour at night. Both trout and bullies are

more active and pose a greater predation risk for invertebrates

during the day (Sagar & Glova, 1994; McIntosh &

Townsend, 1996). It may be that the effects of fish

predation on invertebrate behaviour are less pronounced

at night in streams with trout and bullies, especially at

their natural densities, implying that the overall effect of

fish on invertebrate behaviour in real streams might have

been overestimated in our study Few experiments have investigated the interplay between

disturbance and predation in frequently disturbed streams

where invertebrate communities are typically dominated

by highly mobile species. In an experiment quite similar to

ours but conducted in a stable stream dominated by slowmoving,

grazing cased caddis flies, Nystro®m & McIntosh

(2003) found largely independent effects of bed disturbance

and fish predation on lower trophic levels, in contrast to our

study where the two factors interacted in several cases.

When examining stonefly predation combined with hydrological

disturbance in channels deployed in a flood-prone

Australian stream, Thomson et al. (2002) observed that

stoneflies affected their prey (grazing mayflies) more

strongly if flow was variable rather than stable, in contrast

to our main findings. However, Thomson et al.ís (2002) flow

manipulation did not cause bed movement, a key criterion

of whether a spate or flood represents a disturbance to the

benthic community (Poff, 1992), so their experimental

disturbance was clearly less severe than ours. By contrast,

two experiments in flood-prone streams that involved bed

movement as part of the experimental disturbance delivered

results more consistent with ours.When excluding fish

from 2.25 m2 patches in a 30-m reach of the Kauru River,

Herrmann (2009) found a reduced impact of fish presence

on invertebrates and algae in disturbed (scour or fill) bed

patches compared with stable patches. In a similar experiment

in a moderately flood-prone German stream, Effenbergeret

al. (2011) concluded that bed disturbance strongly

affected the invertebrate community, while fish predation

had a less prevalent effect.

We suggest that predation remained an important

factor structuring the community studied by Thomson

et al. (2002) because the disturbance involved was relatively

slight. In the present study, and in the cases of

Herrmann (2009) and Effenberger et al. (2011), in contrast,

fish predation was less important because considerable

bed movements occurred. This interpretation of the

combined findings of these studies is again consistent

with the predictions of Poff & Ward (1989) and Townsend

(1989) for frequently disturbed streams.