xabstract
An established population of Cabomba caroliniana now covers extensive littoral areas in
the shallow waters of Kasshabog Lake (Ontario). This is the first known naturalized population of this
non-native aquatic macrophyte, commonly called fanwort, on the Canadian side of the Great Lakes basin,
despite the fact that it was first reported in the 1930s. High dispersal potentials combined with the ability
to adapt and grow in a range of environmental conditions have made C. caroliniana a nuisance species in
Australia, Japan, and parts of the United States. However, little is known about the broader ecological
implications of its introduction and establishment. Using a survey approach, we conducted a preliminary
assessment of water chemistry, macrophyte, epiphytic algae, and macroinvertebrate communities found
in C. caroliniana beds and compared them with native macrophyte beds in Kasshabog Lake. Light penetration
was significantly reduced in the C. caroliniana beds and was the only sampled physio-chemical
parameter that differed between bed types. We also found several notable differences in the structure and
composition of biological communities within macrophyte beds. While native macrophytes were present
in dense C. caroliniana beds, abundance was considerably low and unevenly distributed. Significantly
more epiphytic algae was present on C. caroliniana plants, however community composition was comparable
with epiphytic algae found on native macrophytes. The taxonomic composition of macroinvertebrates
was similar between C. caroliniana and native beds, while abundance was substantially higher in
C. caroliniana beds, owing to high densities of coenagrionids and chironomids. These differences suggest
that C. caroliniana is changing macrophyte community composition in this lake, having an impact on epiphytic
algae, and creating a new habitat for some macroinvertebrates. Further studies are required to
determine the extent of these ecological impacts.



xintroduction


Cabomba caroliniana was first discovered in the
Great Lakes basin in 1935 in the St. Joseph River
system in Kalamazoo County, Michigan (Mills et
al. 1993), and while there have been no confirmed
sightings, it is possible that it is currently present in the Great Lakes. Native to Brazil, Argentina,
Paraguay, and Uruguay in South America and the
south-eastern United States (ÿgaard 1991), this
species has readily naturalized lakes in northern
temperate areas (e.g., Noel 2005, Lyon and Eastman
2006). Recent invasions and infestations of
this species, considered a noxious weed, have been
recorded in Australia, Japan, Malaysia, India, and
the United States (e.g., ÿgaard 1991, Mackey and
 Swarbrick 1997). Little work has been done on this
non-native macrophyte in Canada, until a naturalized
population was discovered in Kasshabog Lake
(Ontario) in 1991 (MacDonald 2002).
As a nuisance species, this competitive, submersed
macrophyte, commonly known as fanwort,
grows prolifically and forms dense populations,
which can displace native macrophyte species and
may alter nutrient cycling (Sheldon 1994, Mackey
and Swarbrick 1997, Wilson et. al. in press). Typically
monotypic stands of C. caroliniana are known
to impede water flow, alter navigation patterns, affect
water quality, and restrict recreational activities
(Mackey and Swarbrick 1997, MacDonald 2002).
C. caroliniana is a submersed, perennial plant of
the Nymphaeaceae that grows primarily from vegetative
fragments and rhizomes with shallow, fibrous
roots in stagnant to slow-flowing water bodies (e.g.,
ponds, lakes, small rivers) with silty substrates.
Finely divided submersed leaves are fan-shaped and
typically found in opposite pairs, although are sometimes
in whorls of three, while floating leaves are
long and slender (1ñ3 mm wide/ 20 mm long) and
alternate on the stem (ÿgaard 1991). The stems and
leaves range in color from grass to olive green or are
sometimes reddish brown. Solitary white emergent
flowers are borne on long stalks. C. caroliniana,
commonly referred to as fanwort, could be confused
with native macrophytes, including Myriophyllum,
Ceratophyllum, Megalodonta beckii, and Ranunculus
trichophyllus, due to similar growth forms. However,
C. caroliniana can be distinguished by the
opposite pairs of palmately divided submersed
leaves and the alternating floating leaves.
C. caroliniana is most commonly found in shallow
waters (1ñ3 m), covering extensive areas of
lake littoral zones, but can also grow in deeper waters.
Warm temperatures (13ñ27∞C), humid climates,
and slightly acidic waters (pH 4ñ6) are
considered optimal growing conditions. However
C. caroliniana can withstand temperatures less than
0∞C and can successfully overwinter under ice in
northern regions (Riemer and Ilnicki 1968, Noel
2005). This opportunistic species is adapted to seasonal
fluctuations in water levels and has shown increased
adventitious root development in
moderately turbid, light-limited waters (Mackey
and Swarbrick 1997). At the end of the growing
season, stems become brittle and break apart. These
fragments remain green, persist over winter, and resume
growth in the spring. Mechanical fragmentation
is also common during the growing season,
particularly due to human activities (e.g., motor
boating). Without contact with substrate, spontaneous
adventitious rooting occurs at the nodes and
rhizomes of free floating shoots (ÿgaard 1991), facilitating
dispersal of the plants. Any fragment,
with a single pair of expanded leaves, can produce a
mature individual (Gregory 1974). Seed production
does not appear to be a viable means of reproduction
in northern areas (Noel 2005), but is important
for reproduction in this insect pollinated species in
southern areas. The morphology and biology of this
species have been thoroughly described elsewhere
(see ÿgaard 1991, Wilson et al. in press).
Few studies have been conducted on biological
communities found within C. caroliniana beds.
This information is critical for understanding the
broader ecological implications of the introduction
and establishment of this non-native macrophyte.
For example, reduced dissolved oxygen in the
lower layers of dense non-native macrophyte beds
(Unmuth et al. 2000) or exposure to plant-secreted,
allelopathic compounds (Nakai et al. 1999, Gross
2003) are known to negatively affect macroinvertebrates
or algae. Alternatively, these communities
could be positively affected by increased food
availability or the creation of refuge from predators
(Davork and Best 1982).
The initial introduction of C. caroliniana into
Kasshabog Lake likely resulted from an inadvertent
dumping of an aquarium (MacDonald 2002). Alternatively,
it may have been transferred on a boat propeller
or trailer from an invaded lake in the United
States. This established population provided an opportunity
to study the ecological impact of this nonnative
species on other aquatic communities.
Currently, extensive beds of C. caroliniana are only
found at localized sites which made it possible to
compare invaded and non-invaded native macrophyte
beds within the lake. Using a survey approach,
we conducted a preliminary assessment of
the macrophyte, epiphytic algae, and macroinvertebrate
communities found in of C. caroliniana beds
and compared them with native macrophyte beds in
Kasshabog Lake. This work will provide the basis
for future food web studies.
xmethods



Kasshabog Lake (77∞55'N, 44∞38'W) is a large
(809 ha), relatively shallow lake (Zmean = 4.5 m) located
in Peterborough County, Ontario. Kasshabog
Lake is part of a watershed that ultimately drains
into the Trent Severn Waterway and flows into
Lake Ontario at the Bay of Quinte. The shoreline is extensively developed with cottages and the lake is
highly used for recreational activities including
boating and fishing.
Six small bays, three dominated by native species
(Potamogeton robbinsi, Najas flexillis, Myriophyllum
sibiricum, or Elodea canadensis) and three
dominated by C. caroliniana, were selected within
the lake (Fig. 1.). Sampling sites (1 m2) were randomly
selected in the littoral zone (~1 m deep) at
the end of each bay which provided protection from
prevailing winds and had similar shoreline profiles
and organic sediment substrate. C. caroliniana can
be found growing at depths up to 5 m, but is found
in greatest abundance in these more protected sites.
Three replicate samples were taken in each bay (n =
18). This study was designed to identify changes in
the biological communities in C. caroliniana beds
compared to native beds and as a basis for future
food chain impact studies.Water chemistry, submersed macrophyte, epiphytic
algae, and macroinvertebrate samples were
collected in this order at each site in early September
2005, before macrophyte die-off occurred. Noel
(2005) found that C. caroliniana in Kasshabog
Lake continues to accumulate biomass well into
October. Water samples (1 L) were taken from each
site and analyzed in the lab for pH, total phosphorus,
and chlorophyll a. Total phosphorus samples
were digested using potassium persulfate and analyzed
on an Ultrospec Biochrom spectrophotometer.
Chlorophyll a samples were filtered through Whatman
GF/C microfiber filters and frozen. Later,
chlorophyll a was extracted using 90% acetone and
analyzed using a spectrophotometer.
All macrophytes found in each 1 m2 quadrat were
physically removed and collected. Species were
separated and identifications were made to the
species level, if possible, according to Crow and
Hellquist (2000). Samples were dried for 48 hr and
weighed for biomass.
Epiphytic algae were collected from the upper
shoots (~15 cm) of the dominant macrophyte
species at each site by inverting a sampling jar over
the plant and cutting the stem, to ensure minimal
disturbance of loosely attached epiphytes. The
depth at which this sample was taken was dependent
on the height of the dominant plant and was
not necessarily at the same depth below the surface.The 100 mL sample jar was vigorously shaken for
30 seconds to remove epiphyton, after which the
plant material was removed, dried for 48 hr and
weighed. In the lab, the macrophyte-free water was
filtered through a GF/C filter for chlorophyll a
analysis. Epiphytic biomass was reported as µg chl
a ∑ g dry weightñ1. Taxonomic analysis was conducted
on sub-samples fixed in Lugolís solution
(Wetzel and Likens 2000). These samples were
scanned for species composition on a compound
microscope at 100x, until a minimum of 300 viable
cells were identified and counted per sample. Taxa
were identified to the genus level according to
Prescott (1982) and Wehr and Sheath (2003).
A D-net sweep was done in each 1 m2 quadrat
for 30 seconds to collect zoobenthos found in the
macrophyte bed and the sediments below. The collection
was made by stirring the sediments and
sweeping throughout the bed. Macroinvertebrates
were identified to the family level (Merritt and
Cummings 1984) and the relative abundance and
biomass were determined for each site.
Untransformed data were combined into native
and Cabomba groups for statistical analyses and a
Studentís T-test was conducted between these
groups. Species diversity and equitability were calculated
using the Shannon Wierner Diversity Index
(Equation 1) and Shannonís equitability (Equation
2). Equitability ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 representing
complete evenness within a community.



xdiscussion

Our findings show that the structure and composition
of biological communities in dense beds of
Cabomba caroliniana differ from those found in
native macrophyte beds in Kasshabog Lake. We
have documented significant differences between
C. caroliniana and native beds for underwater light
conditions, macrophyte equitability, epiphytic algae
biomass, and macroinvertebrate biomass and abundance.
Lake water at all sites was slightly alkaline and
oligotrophic (TP < 10 µg∑Lñ1). Biological productivity
ranged from low (< 3 µg∑Lñ1 chl a) in water
collected from native beds to moderate (2.5ñ9
µg∑Lñ1 chl a) in water collected at C. caroliniana
sites. Notable differences were observed in both
measures of light conditions in the macrophyte beds
(Table 1). Both Io and KPAR were significantly reduced
in the C. caroliniana beds (P < 0.001). At
two study sites, Golden Pond and Portage Bay, the
percentage of surface light reaching the sediments
(Io) were reduced to zero in C. caroliniana beds.
The dense beds of C. caroliniana also produced
steep light extinction curve coefficients (KPAR).
Otherwise, no significant differences were recorded
between physical and chemical characteristics of
the macrophyte beds.
No differences were detected in macrophyte biomass
and diversity between plots dominated by native
plants and Cabomba (p = 0.65 and p = 0.32;
Table 2, respectively), although biomass was
slightly higher and diversity lower in C. caroliniana
beds. Aside from the four native species (Potamogeton
robbinsi, Najas flexilis, Myriophyllum heterophyllum, and Elodea canadensis) which were selected
for in native beds, the biomass of species
found in both bed types (e.g., Vallisneria americana,
Utricularia gibba) was 50% greater in native
beds. Equitability was significantly lower in C. caroliniana
beds (p = 0.001; Table 2). Lower equitability
in C. caroliniana beds, despite selection of sites
dominated by one species, suggests that other
species are less evenly distributed within these
dense stands and may forecast future losses of
macrophyte diversity, particularly for low-growing
native species such as Najas flexilis (Table 3). Ten
species were found within C. caroliniana beds, but
in very low proportions, including Potamogeton
tenuifolius, P. strictafolius, P. zosteriformis, P.
pusillus, Utricularia gibba, U. vulgaris, Vallisneria
americana, Elodea canadensis, Najas flexilis, and
Myriophyllum heterophyllum (Table 3). Noel (2005)
found low densities of only five species established
in C. caroliniana beds in Kasshabog Lake.
The biomass of epiphytic algae (estimated by chl
a) was significantly greater on the upper shoots of
C. caroliniana plants when compared to the upper
shoots of native plants (p = 0.04; Table 2). Mean
biomass was 44% higher on C. caroliniana plants.
This difference likely can be attributed to the
growth morphology (i.e., highly divided leaves;
growing just below the surface of the water where
light levels are greatest and competition from other and equitability (p = 0.45; Table 2) were not significantly
different between the macrophyte bed types.
The lack of difference in epiphytes found on C. caroliniana
and native plants may suggest that species
composition was more related to the lake water
chemistry than the host macrophyte (Cattaneo et al.
1998).
Macroinvertebrate biomass was significantly
higher in natives beds (p = 0.008; Table 2), while
species diversity (p = 0.55; Table 2) and equitability
(p = 0.23; Table 2) did not differ between macrophyte
beds. Community composition was similar
between C. caroliniana and native beds. Of the
eleven families identified, all were found in both
macrophyte bed types, except Gammarus, which
was only found on native plants. Total abundance
was substantially higher in C. caroliniana beds,
owing to high densities of coenagrionids and chironomids
(p = 0.023; Table 5). In fact, mean overall
abundance and the abundance of chironomids, coenagrionids,
and hepatgeniid mayflies were all significantly
higher in C. caroliniana beds (p < 0.05).
The increased abundance of some predators (e.g.,
odonates, chironomids) in C. caroliniana beds contributed
to significantly more invertebrates being
found, despite greater biomass being recorded in
native beds. This could suggest that C. caroliniana
beds are providing new habitats for some predacious
macroinvertebrates. Finely dissected leaves
and complex architectures are known to provide superior
habitats for invertebrates (Dvorak and Best
1982)
Based on its extensive distribution and rapid
spread within this central Ontario lake, we expect
this non-native species will invade other lakes
linked by the Trent-Severn Waterway, which ultimately
flows in Lake Ontario. By the summer of
2005, C. caroliniana was documented in the North
River and two other lakes connected to Kasshabog
Lake (H. Smith, pers. comm.). The expansion of
dense monotypic stands of C. caroliniana will
likely have implications for littoral zone food web
interactions in lakes or wetlands within the Great
Lakes basin. For example, the displacement of
structurally diverse native macrophyte beds can
alter resource and habitat availability for macroinvertebrates,
affecting both primary and secondary
productivity rates. Or, dense beds of invasive exotic
macrophytes have been linked with reduced foraging
efficiency and success of fish (Keast 1984,
Engle 1995).
This preliminary survey has identified several
differences in light conditions, macrophyte, epiphytic algal, and macroinvertebrate communities in
C. caroliniana beds compared to existing beds of
native macrophytes. These results merit further
studies which should include more extensive sampling
and be designed to determine potential impacts
of C. caroliniana on food web dynamics.