xabstract
We examined how dominance (% canopy
cover) and invasion history of common reed, Phragmites
australis, affected benthic macroinvertebrate
diversity and density in 8 marshes along Lake Erieís
southern shoreline. We also compared macroinvertebrate
densities among patches (0.25 m2
) of reed, cattail
(Typha spp.), and native flora (e.g., Sagittaria, Sparganium)
and epiphytic algal communities on submerged
stems of reed and cattail. Narrow-leaf cattail
(T. angustifolia) is also a common invasive plant to
these wetlands, but does not greatly change plant
community composition or ecosystem conditions like
reed. Macroinvertebrate diversity (ShannonñWeaver
H0
) was positively related to reed cover and was highest
(4.6) in two marshes with *35- and 5-year invasion
histories. Shading from high reed cover increased
H0
-diversity, in part, by reducing the abundance of
floating duckweed, which harbored many Hyalella
azteca amphipods. Percent Ephemeroptera, Odonata,
and Trichoptera was low to moderate across marshes,
regardless of reed cover and invasion history. Macroinvertebrate
density was not affected by reed cover or
average plant stem density, and did not differ among
plant types. However, epiphyton densities and %
diatoms were greater on reed than on cattail, suggesting
reed provides a better feeding habitat for microalgal
grazers than Typha. Abundance rankings of common
species in these diatom-dominated communities were
also typically dissimilar between these plant types.
Although % grazers was unrelated to epiphyton densities
and % diatoms, grazer identity (snails) differed
between natural and diked marshes, which had different
microalgal food supplies. Our findings suggest that
Phragmites does not necessarily adversely affect macroinvertebrate
community structure and diversity and
that invasion history alone has little effect on the
H0
-diversityñreed dominance relationship.
xintroduction
Emergent macrophytes play a major role structuring
benthic communities in salt and freshwater marshes
(Bertness 1991). Macrophytes can directly affecbenthic communities by providing habitat and trophic
support (Dvorak and Best 1982), and indirectly affect
them by influencing ecosystem-processes such as
hydrology, nutrient status, and sedimentation rate
(Levin and Talley 2000; Cooper et al. 2007).
Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud., the
common reed, is a tall ([2-m), perennial grass that
has existed in wetland plant communities in North
America for at least 3,000 years (Orson et al. 1987).
However, only in the last *60 years has reed greatly
expanded its range to displace native vegetation in
many brackish and freshwater marshes (Marks et al.
1994). Reasons for its rapid spread and dominance
probably include the introduction of a competitively
superior genotype (haplotype M) from Europe
(Galatowitsch et al. 1999; Saltonstall 2002), the
ability of clones to transport nutrients by rhizomes to
different plants in a stand (Amsberry et al. 2000), its
relative unpalatability to invertebrate herbivores
(Polunin 1982; Graca et al. 2001), and its ability to
tolerate, and even thrive in, low water (Marks et al.
1994) and highly saline (Bernstein 1981) conditions.
Habitat homogenization resulting from reed spread
and dominance has been associated with reductions in
benthic fish and macroinvertebrate diversity and
densities in some marine tidal marshes (Angradi
et al. 2001; Able and Hagan 2003; Raichel et al.
2003). However, reed expansion has also led to
neutral or positive effects on the macrobenthos (Fell
et al. 1998; Able and Hagan 2000; Warren et al.
2001; Hanson et al. 2002; McClary 2004), in part
because reed effects on abundance patterns can be
highly taxon-specific (Talley and Levin 2001).
Between-system variation in reed effects may also
partly relate to differences in stand age/size and the
relative dominance of reed within the plant community.
Rooth et al. (2003) found reed standing crops to
be 39 greater, and sedimentation rates 29 greater, in
20-year old stands than in 5-year old stands in a tidal
marsh in Eastern Maryland. As aging reed beds
spread to form near-monocultures, the eventual
collapse and submersion of their above-ground
biomass ([1 kg m-2 year-1
; Kve?t and Westlake
1998; Warren et al. 2001) creates large detrital pools
that can affect system hydroperiods and geochemical
patterns (Kneib 1997; Templer et al. 1998), and cause
sediment anoxia and phytotoxin accrual (Armstrong
et al. 1996). Decreases in hydroperiod from both
sedimentation and reed litter accumulation can, in
turn, decrease macroinvertebrate and fish abundance
(Fell et al. 2003; Raichel et al. 2003). However,
Phragmites invasion, at least initially, may produce
mixed vegetative stands that actually increase habitat
heterogeneity (Posey et al. 2003), and possibly
macrofaunal and epifloral diversity. Thus, determining
whether Phragmites has a qualitatively different
effect on patterns of benthic biodiversity in stands of
different age or relative dominance is highly relevant
to whether and when reed is controlled and how
marshes are managed to maintain biodiversity.
Here, we compare benthic macroinvertebrate and
epiphytic algal communities in Lake Erie coastal
marshes with varying amounts and invasion histories
of reed. We realize timing of invasion does not
necessarily correspond with stand age, but dates of
reed establishment and spread can relate to changes
in system spatial structure and biophysical processes
(Rooth and Stevenson 2000; Rooth et al. 2003),
which may influence current abundance patterns of
the benthos. Reed has historically been a minor
component of wetland plant communities of the
Lower Laurentian Great Lakes, but has spread rapidly
since 2000 when lake water levels decreased (Wilcox
et al. 2003). To date, only a few studies done in
freshwater wetlands have explicitly examined Phragmites
effects on benthic community structure, but
these studies suggest that densities of macroinvertebrates,
fish, and amphibians are similar between small
(\0.5 ha), young (\6-years old) stands of reed and
cattail (Typha spp.) (Meyer 2003; Kulesza et al.
2008). Narrow-leaf cattail (T. angustifolia L.) is
another invasive plant common to many Great Lakes
coastal marshes (Reed 1988; Shih and Finkelstein
2008) but is rapidly being replaced by reed
(Marks et al. 1994; Wilcox et al. 2003). However,
T. angustifolia is considered more ëdesirableí because
it has not caused dramatic changes in plant composition,
or supposedly altered wetland function and
value, like reed (Findlay et al. 2002). Effects of reed,
as well as plant type and heterogeneity, on epiphyton
communities in these marshes are essentially
unknown, but are important to understanding grazer
assemblages and trophic structure.
Our study addressed several questions: (1) How
does macroinvertebrate diversity relate to reed dominance
(% canopy cover) and invasion date? (2) Do
macroinvertebrate densities differ between patches of
reed, cattail, and native flora? (3) Do epiphyton densities and assemblages differ between P. australis
and Typha angustifolia stems? Thus, we also aimed
to explore how these invasive plants might differentially
affect benthic biodiversity in freshwater marsh
ecosystems.
xmethods
We sampled 8 marshes along Lake Erieís southern
shoreline from Lake Co., Ohio, *40 km NE of Cleveland (41240
N, 81510
W) to Ottawa Co.
*25 km E of Toledo (41360
N, 83480
W) and
Maumee Bay (Fig. 1). Surface waters of each wetland
are linked to Lake Erie to varying degrees and in
different ways. Sheldon Marsh is affected by lake
seiches and water levels by a permanent *25-m wide
connection at the western end of its 1.8-km long
barrier beach (Morang and Chader 2005). Old
Woman Creek (OWC) and Arcola Creek are drowned
river mouths that are connected to Lake Erie only
after floods destroy sand-barriers built during storm
interludes (Herdendorf et al. 2004). Dupont Marsh is
a riparian wetland along the Huron River, so it is
indirectly linked to Lake Erie 2.5 km to the north.
Mentor Marsh is *1-km south of Lake Erie and lies
in the ancient bed of the Grand River (Whipple
1999). It is unclear how the marshís hydrology is
connected to Lake Erie (Fineran 2003). Darby,
Magee, and Metzger Marshes are diked and have
only narrow, regulated connections or pumps to Lake
Erie to draw enough water to stabilize water levels to
maintain emergent vegetation for macrofaunal communities
(de Szalay and Cassidy 2001). Despite their
hydrological differences, these marshes are generally
eutrophic, owing to agriculture or urbanization in
their watersheds (Herdendorf et al. 2004).
Reed amount and age vary among these wetlands
(Table 1) because of differences in invasion history,
control efforts, and salt contamination. Reed was
absent or rare in Sheldon, OWC, Dupont, and the
Fix diked marshes until the drop in Lake Erie water levels
in 2000 shifted the vegetation mainly from openwater
plant communities dominated by American
lotus (Nelumbo lutea Willd.) and water lily (Nymphaea
odorata Ait., Nuphar advena Ait.) to emergent
plant communities dominated by T. angustifolia and
Phragmites (Trexel-Kroll 2002; Whyte et al. 2009).
Based on this shift, we estimate reed stands in these
marshes to be B4-years old at the time of the study.
The native, mixed plant communities in these
marshes, and Arcola Creek, contain mostly sedges
(Carex spp., Sparganium sp., Schoenoplectus acutus
Muhl. ex Bigelow), and broad-leaf herbaceous
emergents (Sagittaria latifolia Willd.) (Reed 1988;
Whyte et al. 2003). Phragmites is only patchily and
sparsely distributed in Arcola Creek largely because
of a cutting regime in the mid-1980s that reduced
reed abundance and vigor and facilitated recovery of
a mixed plant community (Marks et al. 1993). In
contrast, reed is essentially the only macrophyte in
Mentor Marsh, probably because of its ability to
tolerate salt leaching from a nearby mine (Whipple
1999). Even in 1976, reed covered 60ñ70% of the
marsh (Bernstein 1981). Thus, some reed stands in
both Arcola Creek and Mentor Marshes are probably
C20-years old.Macroinvertebrates were sampled on 8 dates from 3
July to 26 August 2004. One wetland was sampled on
each date, and an area (*3ñ4 ha) with a mix of
Phragmites, Typha, and native flora was sampled at
each wetland, except Mentor. Sample areas were
selected mainly on the basis of accessibility by canoe,
footpath, or nearby road. Samples were taken in a
0.5 9 0.5 m throw trap (0.5 m high, open top and
bottom), framed by wood and sided with nylon
screening (5 mm mesh). The bottom was weighted
with rebar to help sink and keep the trap flush with
bottom sediments. To further increase capture effectiveness,
throws were usually made 1ñ5 m within the
emergent plant zone, where Phragmites stem heights
at apex were typically \2.0 m and water depths
\0.4 m. Throws were made at 10 m intervals along
*50ñ100 m-long transects that generally paralleled
edges of emergent plant zones. Within each wetland,
17ñ20 throws were made along 2 or 3 transects.
Within each throw, live macrophyte stems were
counted and vegetative microhabitats were assigned
as Phragmites-dominated, Typha-dominated or native
flora-dominated (i.e., native emergent and floatingleaved,
rooted plants) based on a plant type comprising[50%
of the total stem count. Immediately after
counts, a standard D-frame net (800 9 900-lm
mesh) was used to sweep the inside of the trap until
no macroinvertebrates were captured in two consecutive
sweeps. Each sample was preserved in 95%
ethanol in a Ziploc bag (1 gal.). Macroinvertebrates
were sorted from vegetative debris in the laboratory
and stored in 95% ethanol. Macroinvertebrates were
usually identified to genus using Brigham et al.
(1982) and Peckarsky et al. (1990) as primary
references. We lacked the expertise for generic
identifications of the Oligochaeta and Hydrachnida,
and thus used higher classifications, and we identified
chironomids to subfamily.
Macroinvertebrate communities in sampled areas
of each wetland were characterized using the ShannonñWeaver
diversity index (H0
) (Shannon and
Weaver 1963), density estimates, functional feeding
group composition, and proportion of Ephemeroptera,
Odonata, and Trichoptera (% EOT). The Shannonñ
Weaver formula incorporates both species richness
and evenness, and is expressed as:H0 º X pilnpi
where pi is the proportion of individuals found in the
ith species. H0 was computed from a composite of all
throws in a wetland. Densities were calculated for
each throw in each wetland and expressed as
individuals/m2
. However, densities were likely
underestimated because the use of both the throw
trap and dip net undoubtedly allowed some mobile
organisms to escape capture (Kulesza et al. 2008).
Each taxon collected at each wetland was assigned to
one of four key functional feeding groups, shredders,
predators (piercers, engulfers), grazers, and collectorgatherers,
or a fifth group, other (i.e., parasites,
scavengers, unassigned) using mainly Merritt and
Cummins (1996). Last, % EOT, an indicator of
system ecological health (Stewart and Downing
2008), was calculated as the density of these groups
divided by the total macroinvertebrate density in the
wetland, times 100.After throws, epiphyton was collected from 3
Phragmites and 3 Typha stems at each wetland to
compare algal composition and densities between
plant types and wetlands. Stems were collected
along the same transects as throws but at a location
where both reed and cattail were present. Our aim in
choosing all stems from one location within a
sample area was to decrease the effect of spatial
variability on epiphyton communities between plant
types. A *10 cm long piece of submerged, live
stem was cut near the base, placed in a PVC tube
with corked ends, and refrigerated in the laboratory
at 4C. After *24 h, length and diameter of each
host stem was measured to determine surface area to
estimate algal cell densities, and algae from the
entire stem were scraped with the blunt side of a
scapel into distilled water of known volume to
determine assemblages. Samples were homogenized
to produce a uniform suspension, and all units
from a *0.04 mL subsample were placed on a
22 9 22 mm cover slip and counted at 4009
magnification. A unit was equivalent to a cell for
colonial and unicellular algae or a 10-lm length of
filamentous algae with relatively large cells (e.g.,
Mougeotia). Either 300 units were counted or 500
fields (field area = 0.1257 mm2
) were viewed for
each sample. Epiphyton H0 for each plant type per
wetland was computed from a composite of counts
from sample stems. Cell counts were used to
compute densities (cells/cm2
) and to determine
relative abundances (%) of the common divisions,
Bacillariophyta (diatoms), Chlorophyta (green
algae), and Cyanophyta (blue-greens). Taxa were
identified to genus or species using Wehr and
Sheath (2003).
An additional subsample (5ñ10 mL) was taken
from each sample per wetland to confirm diatom
identification and to determine diatom assemblages,
because these algae are an important food to grazers
(Lamberti and Moore 1984). Subsamples were
cleaned with concentrated sulfuric acid, 6% potassium
dichromate, and concentrated hydrogen peroxide,
air-dried on a cover slip, and mounted on a slide
with Hyrax medium. Typically 200ñ250 diatoms
per subsample were counted and identified to genus
or species using Krammer and Lange-Bertalot (1986,
1988, 1991a, b).We estimated % canopy cover, used as an indicator of
reed relative dominance, and determined the water
chemistry of sample areas in each wetland. Reed
cover was estimated visually in 1-m2 quadrats
outlined by PVC pipe. A quadrat was positioned
1ñ2 m from the side, but outside the path, of each
throw. The mean cover from the 17ñ20 quadrat
samples per wetland was assigned to one of five
classes, each corresponding to a specific % cover
range: 0ñ5, [5ñ25, [25ñ50, [50ñ75, and [75ñ100
(Brower et al. 1998). This cover range was used as an
estimate of % reed cover in the sampled area of a
wetland. The advantage of this coarse-scale classifi-
cation is that there is little chance of personal error in
class assignments, yet when results from many small
quadrats per site are averaged, dominance differences
among sites can become evident (Daubenmire 1968).
Samples for water chemistries (n = 3 per wetland)
were taken 5ñ10 cm below the surface from an
untrampled area along transects where stems were
collected. Each sample was collected in a 250 mL
acid-rinsed, polypropylene bottle, immediately
placed on ice in the field, refrigerated (4C) in the
laboratory, and analyzed within 24 h of collection.
Nitrate (NO3
-) and phosphate (PO4
-3
), indicators of
eutrophication and determinants of microalgae productivity
and composition (Borchardt 1996), were
measured by the cadmium reduction method and the
ascorbic acid, two reagent method, respectively,
using a spectrophotometer. Calcium (Ca?2
), a
potential limiting element for gastropods (Lodge
et al. 1987), which are key grazers in some of these
systems (Kulesza et al. 2008), was measured using
atomic absorption spectrophotometry (APHA 1998).
Chloride (Cl-) levels, which can vary greatly
between marshes depending on pollutional source
and affect reed abundance (Whipple 1999), were
measured by potentiometric titration using a standard
silver nitrate solution (APHA 1998).Multiple regression analyses (Wilkinson 2000,
SYSTAT version 9.0) were used to determine
whether % Phragmites cover and total macrophyte
stem density affected macroinvertebrate H0 and
density, and % EOT. For Phragmites cover, we used the average estimated cover range (1ñ5) of each
sample area per wetland in the model. We compared
macroinvertebrate densities between Phragmites, Typha,
and native flora with two-way ANOVA, using
wetland (excluding Mentor) as a blocking variable
(SYSTAT 9.0). Relative proportions of the five
functional feeding groups were compared among
wetlands using a G-test for heterogeneity (Sokal and
Rohlf 1995). Multiple regressions were also used to
determine whether grazer abundance (%) was related
to epiphyton densities and % diatoms and whether
epiphyton densities and % diatoms were related to
NO3
- and PO4
-3 levels (SYSTAT 9.0). We ran paired
t-tests to compare epiphyton H0
, density, and %
diatoms between reed and cattail because sample
stems were taken from one general locality in each
wetland, which might correlate their epiphyton communities
in some way (Sokal and Rohlf 1995).
Relative frequencies of the dominant diatoms were
compared between reed and cattail for each wetland
using Kendallís coefficient of concordance (W) (Sokal
and Rohlf 1995). Percent EOT and grazer abundance
were arscine-transformed, whereas stem, algal, and
macroinvertebrate densities were log (x ? 1) transformed
prior to analyses to homogenize variances.

results
Multiple regression showed that macroinvertebrate
diversity (H0
) was positively related to Phragmites
cover (Fig. 2; Table 2). Sample areas in Mentor and
Metzger Marshes, with high reed cover (50ñ75%),
had the highest H0
-diversity (4.6), whereas Sheldon
Marsh, with low reed cover and a relatively high
abundance of floating-leaved macrophytes, had the
lowest H0
-diversity (1.1) (Table 3). Average macrophyte
stem density did not significantly influence
macroinvertebrate H0 (Table 2).
Phragmites cover and average macrophyte stem
density did not affect sample-area macroinvertebrate
density (multiple regression, R2 = 0.036, P = 0.912,
n = 8) (Table 3). Among plant types, average
(±1SE) macroinvertebrate density, computed by
pooling throws across wetlands, was slightly greater
in Phragmites (183 ± 34, n = 39) than in Typha
(116 ± 16, n = 58) and native flora (158 ± 16n = 48), but this difference was not statistically
significant (2-way ANOVA, plant type, F2,117 =
1.764, P = 0.176).
Functional feeding group composition varied
greatly among wetlands (GH = 10,217, df = 4,
P\0.001), as did the dominant feeding group in each
wetland (Fig. 3). Grazers were particularly abundant in
Mentor, where Gyraulus sp. and Physa sp. snails
together comprised 32% of all macroinvertebrate
captures. Grazer abundance (%) was unrelated to
epiphyton densities and % diatoms (multiple regression,
R2 = 0.222, P = 0.535, n = 8), but grazer
identity differed between diked and natural marshes.The snails Physa sp. and Fossaria sp. were generally
the dominant grazers in natural marshes, except at
Sheldon where Physella gyrina Say was especially
abundant. However, Stagnicola sp. was the dominant
snail in diked marshes, and was not captured in the
natural marshes. Average stem density was also greater
in diked marshes than in natural marshes (Table 3;
1-way ANOVA, F1,6 = 19.131, P = 0.030). Mean
water Ca?2 levels were C30 mg/L in all marshes
(Table 1); levels B5 mg/L can limit shell formation,
and hence, snail abundance (Lodge et al. 1987).
Shredding macroinvertebrates were particularly
abundant at Sheldon and Darby, where the amphipod
Hyalella azteca Saus. comprised 64 and 57% of total
macroinvertebrate captures, respectively. Amphipods
were particularly abundant in throws with duckweed
(mostly Lemna minor L.). Predators, especially
Trichocorixa spp. waterboatmen, were abundant at
Arcola Creek and Metzger Marshes.
Percent EOT ranged from *1 to 18% across
wetlands (Table 3) and varied independently from
both Phragmites cover and macrophyte stem density
(multiple regression, R2 = 0.144, P = 0.679, n = 8).
The predominant ephemeropterans in all marshes
were Caenis latipennis Banks and Callibaetis sp.,
whereas the dominant odonates were Anax junius
Drury, Ischnura verticalis Say, and I. posita Hagen.
The only trichopteran captured was Polycentropus sp.
at Darby.
Epiphyton
Epiphyton H0 did not differ between reed and cattail
stems from the 7 marshes with both macrophytes
(paired t-test, t = -1.473, P = 0.191, df = 6)
(Fig. 4). Reed epiphyton H0 was highest at Mentor
Marsh and Arcola Creek (both 3.1). However,
epiphyton densities were significantly higher on
Phragmites than on Typha (t = -2.604, P = 0.040,
df = 6), as were % diatoms (t = 3.972, P = 0.007,
df = 6) (Fig. 4). Location-specific epiphyton densities
and % diatoms, computed by pooling stem types
within each marsh, were unrelated to NO3
- and PO4
-3
levels (multiple regression, both P C 0.562).
Diatoms comprised, on average, 80ñ98% of epiphytic
algal communities in all wetlands, except At Metzger, the cyanophtye Tolypothrix tenuis
Ku®tz. and the chlorophytes Ulothrix spp. and Oedognoium
sp. jointly comprised 42ñ56 and 79ñ92% of
epiphytic densities on Phragmites and Typha, respectively.
Elsewhere, cyanophytes and chlorophytes
comprised 0ñ11 and *1ñ12% of the microalgal
community, respectively, with Oscillatoria tenuis Ag.
and Pseudoanabaena sp. being the dominant bluegreens
and Oedogonium spp. the dominant green
alga.Metzger Marsh, where \20% of the community was
diatoms (Table 3). Further, 9ñ13 species comprised
C60% of the total diatom density at each wetland.
Rankings of these species were dissimilar between
Phragmites and Typha stems in 5 of 7 wetlands
(Kendallís concordance, all P[0.05), and were
concordant at Darby (W = 0.945, P\0.05) and
Arcola (W = 0.920, P\0.05). Generally, Achnanthes
hungarica Grun. was more abundant on Phragmites,
whereas Navicula confervacea (Ku®tz.) Grun.
was more abundant on Typha (Fig. 5). Other common
diatoms included A. lanceolata (Bre¥b.) Grun., Eunotia
bilunaris Ehrenb., Gomphonema parvulum Ku®tz.,
and Nitzschea palea (Ku®tz.) W. Sm. (Fig. 5).
xdiscussion
We found that reed cover positively affected macroinvertebrate
H0
-diversity, despite using broad cover
categories that likely decreased our ability to detect
an effect. Our results also indicate that macroinvertebrate
densities were similar among patches of reed,
Typha, and native flora. Studies done in oligohaline
salt marshes similarly show that reed invasion and
dominance does not necessarily adversely affect
benthic macroinvertebrate diversity and density (Fell
et al. 1998; Able and Hagan 2000; Warren et al.
2001; Hanson et al. 2002; McClary 2004).
Reed cover, and its effect on light penetration, may
impact the macrobenthos by affecting underlying
epifloral communities, and hence trophic processes.
For example, cordgrass (Spartina foliosa) in salt
marshes can generate considerable shading, which
can increase benthic macrofaunal diversity, particularly
the microalgae grazers, by increasing the
diversity and density of their diatom food supply
(Whitcraft and Levin 2007). Dense reed cover can
also generate considerable shading (Gu®sewell and
Edwards 1999), which may have affected macroinvertebrate
diversity in our sample areas by increasing
diatom abundance (%). We were unable to relate
epiphyton density and % diatoms to reed cover
because algal sampling and reed dominance estimates
were done at different spatial scales (one location vs.
entire sample area, respectively). However, we did
find that diatom-dominated epiphyton was consistently
denser on reed than on Typha across wetlands.
Kulesza et al. (2008) suggested that differences in
epiphyton densities between reed and cattail could be
from differences in allelopathic effects generated by
phytotoxic leachates (phenoloic compounds [e.g.,
caffeic acid, 2-chlorophenol, salicylaldehyde)] from Typha (Gallardo et al. 1998, 1999). They also attributed
a finding of more herbivorous snails in stands of
Phragmites than in Typha to this difference in
microalgal food supply. Regardless of the underlying
mechanism, it appears reed provides a better feeding
habitat for microalgal grazers than Typha.
Still, it remains unclear whether food is driving
grazer abundance in these marshes. Grazer abundance
(%) was unrelated to epiphyton density and %
diatoms; an unexpected result if this trophic link
was bottom-up controlled. However, it is possible
food supply is accounting for some taxon-specific abundance patterns. We found Physa and Stagnicola
gastropods to be the dominant grazers in natural and
diked marshes, respectively. Stagnicola adults are
generally 2ñ39 larger, eat more, and are better
competitors than Physa adults (Brown 1982; Turner
et al. 2007). We also found macrophyte stem
densities to be higher in diked marshes than in
natural marshes. If diatom supply is linked to stem
density, and to hydrological stability that helps ensure
epiphyton submergence, then food may partly explain
abundance differences of these snails between marsh
types.
Reed shading may indirectly affect food supply,
and hence benthic macrofaunal diversity, by directly
affecting duckweed abundance. Floating duckweed
(mostly Lemna minor) was essentially absent from
heavily shaded areas with high reed cover, but was
abundant along the lightly shaded, open waterPhragmites
interface. This pattern was particularly
evident at Sheldon, where we captured large numbers
of H. azteca, a facultative detritivore (Kulesza and
Holomuzki 2006), in dense mats of duckweed near
Nelumbo beds. As a consequence, species evenness,
and hence H0
-diversity (1.1), at the marsh were
relatively low. Chilton (1990) and Hann (1995)
similarly found high numbers of H. azteca in dense
beds of floating-leaved Ceratophyllum, which accumulates
edible organic matter and provides shelter
from predators. Duckweed may provide similar
benefits to amphipods in our study marshes. Although
the exact mechanisms behind our observed relationship
between reed cover and macroinvertebrate
diversity remain unclear, studying how reed shading
affects food supplies, predator hunting success, or
understory physical conditions (e.g., water and sediment
temperatures) will provide information on the
importance of light as a structuring agent of faunal
communities in emergent plant zones.
Invasion history appears to have little influence on
the H0
-diversityñreed dominance relationship. We
found high macroinvertebrate diversity (H0 = 4.6) in
Mentor Marsh, where reed invaded [30 years ago
and comprises *100% of the emergent plant community
(Whipple 1999). Macroinvertebrate H0
-diversity
was also 4.6 in Metzger Marsh, where reed was
rare before 2000. Sampled areas in these marshes also
had the highest reed cover estimates in the survey
(Table 3). Moreover, % EOT was low to moderate
(USEPA 2002; Tangen et al. 2003) across marshes
and unrelated to reed invasion history, further suggesting
other factors are driving macroinvertebrate
abundance patterns. At Mentor, drought caused
standing water to be present only in semi-isolated
pools, where nearly all benthic macroinvertebrates
and fish (mudminnows, Umbra limi Kirt.) were
aggregated. This spatial clustering shaped by surface
hydrology likely contributed to the high macroinvertebrate
H0
-diversity observed at this marsh. Plant
litter accrual, which can positively affect macrobenthic
detritivore densities (Warren et al. 2001), can
likely be ruled out as a factor, given an accidental fire
in 2003 burned roughly a third of the marsh,
including our sample area. Reed was essentially the
only emergent plant present in Mentor the following
year, suggesting the burn was not hot enough to kill
roots. Last, relatively high haline conditions can also
be ruled out as a primary determinant of benthic
biodiversity, given macroinvertebrate and epiphyton
H0 and % EOT were comparatively high at Mentor
(Table 3).
Multiple regression analysis showed that stem
density had no detectable effect on macroinvertebrate
diversity or density, suggesting that macrohabitat
suitability in stands did not depend on live shoot
number per se. Kulesza et al. (2008) similarly
reported that benthic macroinvertebrate densities in
emergent plant zones in OWC were unrelated to stem
densities. However, macroinvertebrate diversity can
be positively related to macrophyte diversity (Whyte
et al. 2009), suggesting that management practices
that promote the long-term maintenance of a diverse
plant community will also promote a functionally
diverse macroinvertebrate community. Even slight
increases in plant diversity can increase macrobenthic
diversity (Whyte et al. 2009), so the curbing of reed
expansion and dominance appears critical to maintaining
overall system health. Short-term control of
reed expansion can be accomplished by herbicide
(glyphosates) application and/or cutting (Carlson
et al. 2009), both of which have no discernable
detrimental effect on macrobenthic communities
(Warren et al. 2001; Kulesza et al. 2008). However,
the macrophyte diversityñfaunal diversity relationship
in these freshwater coastal marshes remains
unclear, particularly when considering the high
macroinvertebrate H0
-diversity in Phragmites-dominated
Mentor Marsh. It does seem clear that systemwide
replacement of native flora by Phragmites causes major shifts in faunal community composition,
at least in brackish marshes (e.g., Benoit and
Askins 1999; Meyerson et al. 2000; Angradi et al.
2001; Robertson and Weiss 2005). We propose that
future studies elucidate the ëëcriticalíí amount or age at
which spatial structure and biophysical processes are
disrupted by reed, given 100% eradication of reed is
probably economically impossible and ecologically
unnecessary. We also suggest more comparative work
be done in Great Lake coastal wetlands, like that of
Meyer (2003), to assess how reed amount/age affects
other macrofauna, such as waterfowl, songbirds,
mammals (e.g., muskrat, deer), and amphibians.