xabstract


Zebra mussels, Dreissena polymorpha, increase macroinvertebrate abundance
on hard substrata in lakes and large rivers because they enhance surface area, substratum
heterogeneity and the accumulation of benthic organic matter (BOM). We tested the hypothesis
that zebra mussel colonization of hard substrata in a lake-outlet stream would similarly
increase macroinvertebrate abundance. Zebra mussels were attached to artificial rocks
(0.05 m2) in a crossed factorial design with two states of mussels (live or dead) and three
densities [low (200∑m22), medium (500∑m22) or high (1000∑m22)] plus a noncrossed control
(no attached mussels). Rocks were placed in an erosional zone of a lake-outlet stream in
southwestern Michigan that contained low densities of zebra mussels. After 28 d total macroinvertebrate
abundance was significantly higher on rocks with high densities of zebra
mussels, but live or dead treatment had no effect on macroinvertebrate abundance. Family
richness differed significantly among density treatments (high 5 medium . low 5 control),
but Simpsonís diversity index did not differ among treatments. We conclude that changes
in macroinvertebrate community structure probably were related to the increased substrate
complexity provided by zebra mussels

xintroduction



Zebra mussels, Dreissena polymorpha, typically dominate the benthic fauna in lakes following
their introduction (e.g., Stewart and Haynes, 1994). Increased densities of benthic macroinvertebrates,
especially deposit feeders, have been found in dense zebra mussel colonies
in lakes (Dermott et al., 1993; Stewart and Haynes, 1994; Wisenden and Bailey, 1995).
Mussels principally affect macroinvertebrate density and biomass by altering the structure
of benthic substrata (Ricciardi et al., 1997; Stewart et al., 1998). Mussel shells increase
habitat space by increasing surface area (Mellina and Rasmussen, 1994) and shells also
provide a complex architecture that many macroinvertebrates can use as refuge from predation
(Stewart et al., 1998). Macroinvertebrates have also been shown to respond positively
to the enhanced benthic organic matter (BOM) deposited by mussels in the form of feces
and psuedofeces (Stewart et al., 1998).
Zebra mussels are colonizing many inland lakes in North America ( Johnson and Carlton,
1996). The outflowing streams of these lakes have a high probability of being colonized as
well (Horvath et al., 1996). As observed in lakes, zebra mussels should increase the surface
area and complexity of substrata in lake-outlet streams. However, flowing water may prevent
the accumulation of mussel feces and pseudofeces, at least in erosional zones. Consequently,
the response of stream macroinvertebrate populations to zebra mussels could differ from
that observed in more depositional habitats if BOM production is important.
We investigated the effect of zebra mussels on macroinvertebrate abundance and diversity
on hard substrata in a lake-outlet stream by manipulating zebra mussels on artificial substrata.
We predicted that zebra mussels would increase macroinvertebrate density and family
richness because of changes in substrate heterogeneity alone. We separated the biotic and abiotic effects of zebra mussels by using treatments of both live mussels and dead mussel
shells at four representative densities ranging from zero to high.
xmethods



This study was conducted in Christiana Creek, a lake-outlet stream in southwestern Michigan,
that was colonized by zebra mussels in 1993. Christiana Creek drains two connected
lakes, Eagle and Christiana lakes, that were colonized by zebra mussels in 1991. Zebra mussel
density in the stream is highest at the lake outlet (;1600∑m22) and declines with distance
downstream to ,1 mussel∑m22 at 2 km downstream (Horvath et al. 1996). The site of our
experiment was 400 m downstream from the lake outlet where the ambient density of
mussels was very low (50∑m22) and stable from 1994ñ1996. The stream has low gradient
near the lake outlet (0.1 m/km; determined from topographic maps), but the site could
be considered an erosional zone because the streambed consisted mostly of small gravel
with depositional sediments occurring only along the stream margins. Channel width was
15 m and mean depth was 86 cm. Discharge during the study was about 2 m3∑s21 (measured
200 m upstream) and no floods occurred during the study. Water velocity rarely exceeded
0.25 m∑s21 at the site. The macrophyte Vallisneria americana and the macroalga Chara sp.
cover of the stream bottom increased from 0% at the left bank to 100% at the right bank,
thus creating a lateral gradient of macrophyte density. Seston concentration in the water
column is generally 7 mg∑L21 (Horvath and Lamberti, in press).
In our experiment, we used a crossed factorial design with two states of mussels (live or
dead) and three density levels [low (10 mussels/rock; 200∑m22), medium (25 mussels/rock;
500∑m22) or high (50 mussels/rock; 1000∑m22)], plus a noncrossed control (no attached
mussels). Artificial substrata (called rocks) were made by pouring concrete into hemispherical
molds. Rocks were dried for 2 wk and then flushed with running water for 24 h to
leach any residual compounds. Surface area of rocks averaged 0.05 6 0.004 m2 (measured
using the foil method of Lamberti et al., 1991). Zebra mussels (shell length 5 13ñ15 mm)
were collected from Christiana Creek at the outlet of Christiana Lake and kept in aquaria
in the laboratory overnight. We estimated the mean surface area of a single mussel shell
to be 3.4 6 0.08 cm2 (61 SE) using the foil method on a subsample of these mussels (n 5
40). Half of the mussels were dried at 608C for 24 h, the dried tissue was removed and shell
halves were glued together with cyanoacrylate glue. A middle point of the ventral surface
of empty shells was glued to rocks with epoxy. Preliminary studies showed that live mussels
tended to emigrate from the rocks. Therefore, live mussels were also carefully glued to
rocks with epoxy such that the ventral side of only one valve was attached to the rock to
allow for normal filtering activity. The epoxy was allowed to set for 1 h while mussels were
kept moist. Rocks with live mussels were then kept in aerated coolers overnight and observed
the next day to ensure that mussels were still alive (indicated by active filtering),
thus ensuring that the epoxy was nontoxic.
Rocks were transported to Christiana Creek in coolers and placed on the streambed on
14 September 1996 in a randomized block design. Blocks (n 5 7) were spaced 1 m apart
and arranged perpendicular to flow. A block design was used because of lateral gradients
in macrophyte cover, depth and velocity across the 15-m-wide channel. The seven treatments
were randomly assigned within the blocks and rocks were set 0.5 m apart within each block.
The experiment was run for 28 d; rocks were checked every 3ñ4 d by snorkeling to ensure
that live mussels were still attached and actively filtering. Rocks were collected on 12 October
1996 by placing a net (100-mm mesh) over the rock, bringing the rock to the surface
within the net, placing the rock and any net contents into a plastic bag and transporting
the sample to the laboratory. Macroinvertebrates, including newly recruited zebra mussels,were removed from the rock using a brush, forceps and a spray of 70% ethanol. All macroinvertebrates
were preserved in 95% ethanol, identified to family when possible and
counted. Zebra mussels originally glued to the rocks were recounted.
Statistical analysis.óFactors in our experiment were mussel state and density. At the
beginning of the experiment, mussels added 170 cm2 (34%), 85 cm2 (17%) and 34 cm2
(7%) to the surface area of the rock at high, medium and low densities, respectively. Some
of the originally glued zebra mussels were lost during the experiment. The final number
of glued mussels was significantly different among the density treatments (F2,36 5 89.76, P
, 0.001; 2-way ANOVA), but did not differ between the live and dead mussel treatments
(F1,36 5 0.56, P 5 0.46), indicating that mussel treatments were maintained during the
experiment. At the end of the experiment, mussels added a mean area (6SE) of 154.2 6
3.1 cm2 (;31%), 80.4 6 1.8 cm2 (;16%) and 31.6 6 1.5 cm2 (;6%) to the surface area
of the rock at high, medium and low densities, respectively. Differences in macroinvertebrate
density, family richness and Simpsonís diversity index (in Begon et al., 1990) among
treatments were tested separately with a blocked two-way ANOVA. Taxa were only identified
to family because all collected macroinvertebrates could not be identified to genus or species.
Control rocks were not analyzed with 2-way ANOVA because they created an unbalanced
design for the live-dead treatment. Nonsignificant (P . 0.05) Bartlettís test for homogeneity
of variances and normal probability plots of residuals indicated that the data
met the assumptions of an ANOVA, thus no data transformations were used. ANOVA was
significant, therefore, treatments were compared pairwise with Tukeyís HSD test. We recalculated
macroinvertebrate density after including the additional surface area provided by
attached mussels and analyzed density using ANCOVA with surface area as the covariate.
Analyses were done using SYSTAT version 5.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago Ill.).
xresults
Twenty-five families of macroinvertebrates were found on the rocks. Hydridae (Hydra
spp.) accounted for 64% of all macroinvertebrates collected, Trichoptera (caddisflies) represented
14% and Gastropoda (snails) 7% (Table 1). Abundance of most macroinvertebrates
increased with higher zebra mussel abundance (density treatments), with the exception
of Heptageniidae, Hydrachnida and rare taxa (Table 1).
A significant block effect was detected in the ANOVA only for Simpsonís diversity (P ,
0.001). The live-dead treatment did not significantly affect total macroinvertebrate abundance
(F1,35 5 1.486, P 5 0.231), Simpsonís diversity (F1,35 5 0.651, P 5 0.806) or family
richness (F1,35 5 0.489, P 5 0.489). No significant interactions with density were found.
Therefore, we pooled live and dead treatments and tested for density differences using a
one-way ANOVA with the control treatment included. Total macroinvertebrate abundance
differed significantly among density treatments (F3,44 5 10.7, P , 0.001; Fig. 1) and was
significantly greater at the high density than all other treatments (Tukeyís HSD test). Simpsonís
diversity was not significantly different among densities (F3,44 5 1.774, P 5 0.185; Fig.
2), but family richness differed significantly among densities (F3,44 5 8.625, P , 0.001; Fig.
2). More taxa were found at higher mussel densities. The ANCOVA also indicated a significant
effect of zebra mussel density on total macroinvertebrate abundance (F3,44 5 6.341, P
5 0.001), with the high-density treatment different from all other treatments.


xdiscussion

The presence of zebra mussel shells increased macroinvertebrate abundance on artificial
rocks in Christiana Creek. Macroinvertebrate density was nearly twice as high on highdensity
treatment rocks than on rocks lacking mussel shells. This positive response was related to physical changes in the 3-dimensional structure of the rock caused by zebra
mussels (either live or dead) rather than biotic interactions. We observed no significant
differences in macroinvertebrate density between rocks with live or dead zebra mussels,
indicating that mussel behavior (e.g., filtration, excretion) did not affect macroinvertebrate
colonization in our system.
Similar and more pronounced responses of macroinvertebrate populations to zebra mussels
are reported for the Laurentian Great Lakes. In Lake Erie macroinvertebrate abundance
is 2ñ7 times greater in sediment cores taken under mussel druses than in samples
from bare sand (Botts et al., 1996) and 2ñ5 times higher on tiles with zebra mussels than
on tiles without zebra mussels (Stewart et al., 1998). In Lake Ontario total macroinvertebrate
abundance is increased 100ñ900% on cobble and artificial reef substrata following invasion
of zebra mussels (Stewart and Haynes, 1994).
In contrast to lake studies mentioned (Botts et al., 1996; Stewart et al., 1998), the response
of macroinvertebrate populations to zebra mussels in Christiana Creek did not depend on
whether the mussels were live or dead. A possible explanation for this difference is that we
used much lower densities of mussels than other studies, although they were 4 to 20 times
higher than background densities in Christiana Creek. Organic matter, whether actively or
passively deposited, may not accumulate at low mussel densities. Differences in macroinvertebrate
community composition between habitats may also contribute to responses. Filterfeeders
were the most abundant macroinvertebrate in Christiana Creek, whereas depositfeeders
were more abundant in the lake studies. Filter-feeders may respond differently to
BOM than deposit-feeders. Ricciardi et al. (1997) found no significant difference in the
density of filter-feeders among live or dead zebra mussels.
Hydrodynamics also differ among aquatic habitats and may determine how macroinvertebrates
respond to zebra mussels. As in lakes, dense populations of zebra mussels in rivers
can reduce seston concentration through their filter-feeding activity (Caraco et al., 1997).
It is likely that feces and pseudofeces produced by mussels in erosional zones (where hard
substrates are typically found) will not accumulate as they might in depositional areas. We
did not observe accumulations of feces or pseudofeces on the artificial rocks, which may
also explain why live zebra mussels had no more effect on benthic macroinvertebrates than
dead mussels.
The significant macroinvertebrate response to zebra mussel density observed in Christiana
Creek, even after considering the added surface area of attached zebra mussels (ANCOVA
analysis), suggests that surface area alone could not explain the positive macroinvertebrate
response. It is likely that zebra mussels attached to rocks increased surface heterogeneity
(e.g., texture, flow, etc.) compared to rocks with no mussels (see also Mellina
and Rasmussen, 1994). The change in the 3-dimensional structure of the rocks could have
affected macroinvertebrates in several ways. For example, some invertebrates are negatively
phototaxic (e.g., triclads; Thorp and Covich, 1991) and the crevices among zebra mussel
shells would provide darker habitats. Crevices also could be used by smaller macroinvertebrates,
such as Chironomidae or Hydroptilidae, as refuges from predation (e.g., Charlebois
and Lamberti, 1996). Greater microhabitat complexity provided by mussels may explain the
increased family richness found on rocks with high densities of mussels, particularly for rare
taxa (e.g., Simuliidae and Elmidae). Simpsonís diversity did not differ among treatments,
probably because Hydra spp. accounted for about 30ñ60% of the macroinvertebrates, resulting
in low evenness overall.
Among aquatic habitats, it appears that benthic macroinvertebrates will respond differently
to zebra mussels depending on habitat characteristics, such as native species composition
and hydrodynamics. The increase in substrate heterogeneity appears to be more important in structuring macroinvertebrate populations than biodeposits from live mussels
in erosional habitats. Zebra mussels readily colonize lake-outlet streams according to a
source (lake) and sink (stream) model (Horvath et al., 1996), but may never attain high
densities as in lakes. Our results suggest that mussels have the potential to affect, and even
increase, benthic macroinvertebrate communities in these invaded ecosystems, especially if
mussels increase substrate heterogeneity, but do not dominate habitat and food resources.
Acknowledgments.óThis study was supported by the US Environmental Protection Agency (CR
820290-01 and CR 820290-02) and by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration through
Purdue University (Purdue subgrant No. 643-1500-01 under NOAA Grant No. NA46RG0419-2 to the
IllinoisñIndiana Sea Grant Program). We thank David Strayer and Pam Silver Botts for valuable comments
on the manuscript, Steve Beaty for help with constructing the artificial rocks, Debra Hasfurther
for assistance with a pilot study and William Perry and David Lodge for useful discussions leading to
this project.