xabstract
The common carp (Cyprinus carpio) is a
globally distributed, benthivorous fish that is capable
of substantially altering lake ecology. Although
dozens of studies have demonstrated that it has the
potential to negatively affect submersed vegetation
and water quality, little attention has been paid to
effects of carp on sediment mixing and sediment
phosphorus (P) in lakes. This study examined carp
effects on sediment mixing and mobile (mainly iron
bound and pore water) sediment P in a shallow,
Midwestern lake (Kohlman Lake, MN, USA)
undergoing restoration with aluminum (Al) to reduce
internal P loading. Using Al as a tracer, we determined
that the sediment mixing depth was at least 2.5 times
greater in areas with carp (13.0 ± 3.7 cm) than in
areas from which carp had been excluded
(5.0 ± 1.2 cm) using exclosures. Vertical sediment
profiles of P mass suggested that the increase in
sediment mixing depth caused by carp increased the
amount of mobile P potentially available for release by
55ñ92%, depending on location within the lake. The
increase in sediment mixing depth is likely to have a
negative effect on the efficacy of management methods
designed to reduce mobile sediment P availability
in lakes.
xintroduction
The common carp (Cyprinus carpio, or carp) is a
large benthivorous fish from Eurasia that has been
widely introduced to other regions over the past
century and is considered to be one of the worldís
most invasive organisms (Kulhanek et al., 2011;
Sorensen & Bajer, 2011). Researchers have long
recognized that carp can fundamentally modify the
structure and function of aquatic ecosystems (Cahn,
1929). Lakes inhabited by dense populations (typically[
100 kg ha-1) of carp are generally characterized by a lack of plants, low native
diversity, and turbid, nutrient-rich water (Haas
et al., 2007; Bajer et al., 2009; Kloskowski, 2011).
Carp dig in the bottom sediment while searching for
food with their mouths (Nikolsky, 1963; Meijer
et al., 1990; Chumchal & Drenner, 2004), uprooting
aquatic plants, re-suspending sediment, and increasing
water turbidity (Crivelli, 1983; Breukelaar et al.,
1994; Lougheed et al., 1998; Zambrano et al., 2001;
Bajer et al., 2009). It has been suggested that carp
play an important role in nitrogen and phosphorus
(P) transport from sediment to the water column as a
result of both physical sediment disturbance (i.e.,
bioturbation) as well as excretion (Lamarra, 1975;
Breukelaar et al., 1994; Moss et al., 2002; Chumchal
et al., 2005; Driver et al., 2005), but the relative
roles of each have not been described in situ.
Although nutrient export from sediment to overlying
waters has been suggested to be an important
element of how carp alter ecosystems, this process has
not been well documented. For example, debate exists
about the magnitude of nutrient fluxes caused by carp
foraging activity and whether these fluxes are primarily
driven by excretion (Lamarra, 1975; Morgan &
Hicks, 2013) and/or bioturbation (Driver et al., 2005).
Although carp excretion rates have been estimated in
experimental enclosures (Lamarra, 1975; Morgan &
Hicks, 2013) and from bioenergetics models (Vanni
et al., 2013), effects of bioturbation on nutrient
availability are very poorly documented. Nutrient
releases due to bioturbation are especially difficult to
estimate because they are influenced by many factors
including sediment properties, chemical milieu (i.e.,
P-binding, pH, oxygen), availability of mobile sediment
P, water column mixing, and carp burrowing
depth. The effects of wild carp on sediment mixing
depth and potential P release have not been investigated
in natural lakes. Of the studies available
investigating changes to sediment, one study using
aquaculture ponds with high-density sediment and
low-carp biomass suggested mixing depth might be as
low as 3 cm (Ritvo et al., 2004). In contrast, a
laboratory study suggested that this depth could reach
15 cm in areas with soft sediments (Nikolsky, 1963).
Due to a lack of clear information on carp sediment
mixing in situ, estimates of this speciesí effects on
sediment P availability are currently not available,
complicating management of sediment and phosphorous
in lakes.
This study determined the effect of carp on sediment
mixing depth and associated changes in potential P
availability in a shallow lake in Minnesota (USA) to
which aluminum sulfate and buffered sodium aluminate
(hereafter, alum) had been added as part of a
restoration project to reduce internal P loading from the
sediment. Alum treatment resulted in the formation
and deposition of amorphous aluminum hydroxide
(Al(OH)3), a relatively inert mineral compound, that
was used as a tracer to estimate carp sediment mixing
depth inside and outside of carp exclosure devices. One
hundred and fifty-two days after alum treatment,
sediment was collected from areas within the lake
where the carp had unobstructed access to sediment
and from areas from which carp were excluded.
Significant differences in sediment mixing depth were
detected and sediment P content was then used to
calculate changes in mass of potentially available P in
the active sediment layer due to increased sediment
mixing depth caused by carp bioturbation.
xmethods
Kohlman Lake is a small (residence time 30 days),
shallow polymictic lake (area 30 ha, mean depth
1.2 m, max depth 2.7 m) located in a suburban area in
south-central Minnesota at the head end of a chain of
urban lakes, USA (Fig. 1). Development within the
watershed of this lake began in the mid-late 1880s,
which has resulted in accumulation of P in the
sediment that contributes to high levels of internal P
loading. This lake was eutrophic at the time of alum
treatment even though it had previously undergone a
number of restoration measures to reduce external P
inputs and improve water clarity and quality. The lake
weakly stratifies and mixes numerous times during the
growing season, resulting in periods of anoxia and
internal sediment P release rates of up to
9.7 mg m-2 days-1 that can contribute up to
25ñ30% or more of the total P load to the lake during
the growing season. One of the final steps in the lake
restoration plan was the application of alum to reduce
the release of legacy P remaining in the sediment. The
average population and biomass densities of carp in
Kohlman Lake were estimated, using mark-recapture
and catch per unit effort electro-fishing, to be approximately
50 individuals ha-1 and 180 kg ha-1, respectively,
at the time of this study (unpublished data). The lake was also inhabited by several species of native
fish, including bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus), black
crappie (Pomoxis nigromaculatus), and largemouth
bass (Salmoides micropterus), none of which forage in
sediment. Radio-telemetry and electro-fishing surveys
(Bajer et al., 2011) suggested that carp were relatively
evenly distributed in the lake.
The experiment began on May 10, 2010, 5 days
prior to alum addition, when we collected 10 sediment
cores to determine background (pre-treatment) sediment
aluminum (Al) concentrations in three cores and
physical properties (density, organic matter, and P
content) in all cores throughout the lake, including the
future exclosure sites (Fig. 1). One of these cores was
excluded from analysis because water depth was
shallow (0.5 m) and the sediment consisted almost
entirely of sand. Three additional cores were collected
from shallow (1 m), moderately deep (2 m), and the
deepest (2.7 m) areas of the lake to determine spatial
variability of sediment P profiles by water column
depth.
Alum was then applied from May 15 to 17, 2010
throughout the lake (approximately 39 g Al m-2). A
combination of aluminum sulfate and buffered sodium
aluminate was used in this case to keep lake water pH
within a range of 6ñ7 during treatment, thereby
maximizing flocculation and precipitation of the
newly formed Al(OH)3. Immediately after application, three circular fish exclosures were
installed in the lake (Fig. 1). Each exclosure had a
diameter of 5 m and was constructed using plastic
mesh (13-cm2 mesh size). Plastic mesh was used to
allow for wind action, water exchange, and fish
removal from the exclosures using electro-fishing.
PVC posts (5-cm diameter) were used as supports for
the structure. Electro-fishing and video surveillance
with underwater cameras were conducted in the
exclosures by boat immediately after enclosure installation
and approximately every 2 weeks thereafter to
ensure that enclosures had no carp. No carp were
detected in the exclosures during the experiment.
Approximately, 5 months (152 days) after alum application
(October 16, 2010), we collected sediment
cores from inside of each exclosure and three
additional areas (north, south, and southwest) in the
lake (N = 3 for each location; Fig. 1) to determine if
carp had an effect on sediment mixing depth. To
address possible wind-mixing effects, effective fetch
at each sampling location was calculated according to
Ha∞kanson & Jansson (1983).
A Willner gravity sediment-coring device (Uppsala,
Sweden) was used to collect all sediment cores, which
were sliced on-site (every 2 cm down to 14 cm and every
4 cm thereafter), and stored in opaque containers at 4C
until analysis that occurred within 1 week of collection.
Sediment P fractions were determined using the sequential
P extraction technique for wet sediment by Psenner
et al. (1988) and modified by Hupfer et al. (1995). All
fractions were determined but only mobile (total amounts
of pore water, loosely sorbed, and reductant soluble) P
and Al bound P (AlñP) are described herein. Soluble
reactive P from sediment extracts was analyzed using the
molybdate blue method (Murphy & Riley, 1962). By
summing the mobile P (minus background) in sediment
layers affected by carp bioturbation, we could thus
calculate the additional amount of mobile P that may be
released to the water column, depending on controlling
physicochemical factors, via carp feeding activity. Total
sediment Al was determined after digestion with 50%
HNO3 at 120Cusing graphite furnace atomic absorption
spectrometry at 309.5 nm. Background concentrations
for Al were estimated by analyzing pre-treatment cores
and deeper sediment layers unaffected by Al treatment in
the post-treatment cores. Natural variability of Al in pretreatment
cores was used to determine excess Al
attributable to treatment, which we defined as an Al
concentration that exceeded two standard deviations of
the mean background Al concentration (approximately
120% of the mean in this case). In addition, we also
calculated and present results based on one standard
deviation (110% of the background mean).
Water content was determined by freeze-drying
sediment after storage at -70C for 24 h, and
sediment density was estimated according to Ha∞kanson
& Jansson (1983) after loss on ignition at 550C
for 2 h. Data used to determine average surface water
quality parameters were downloaded from the Surface
Water Environmental Data Access database (www.
pca.state.mn.us/index.php/data). Means were determined
using available growing season (May through
September) data from the 10 years previous to alum
treatment (Table 1) and 2 years post-alum treatment.
xresults
Prior to alum treatment, Kohlman Lake was characterized
as eutrophic to hypereutrophic. Ten-year prealum
treatment means (±SD) of total P (TP) and
chlorophyll a (Chl a) were 82 (±13) and 29
(±11) ug l-1, respectively, and water clarity, as measured
by Secchi depth, was 1.1 (±0.3) m (Table 1). In
the 2 years following treatment with alum, growing
season means of epilimnetic TP decreased by 51%,
resulting in a decrease in algal growth, measured as Chl
a, of 69%. Secchi depth increased by 40% (Table 1)
and did not appear to reach the bottom of the lake (max
depth = 2.7 m) with the highest value being 2.4 m in
the spring of 2011. The exclosures remained carp free
throughout the experiment although electro-fishing
surveys removed one adult and six juvenile largemouth
bass. Predominant wind direction was from the southwest
during the duration of the experiment.The cores collected prior to alum treatment were
similar across all locations and had elevated mobile P
concentrations (the P fractions that contribute directly
to internal P loading) near the sediment surface that
declined to background concentrations with depth
(Fig. 2). The mean, surficial (0ñ10 cm) concentration
of mobile sediment P at experimental (both exclosure
and non-exclosure) sites was similar and averaged
from 0.17 to 0.18 (±0.02) mg g-1, respectively,
ranging from 0.15 to 0.20 mg g-1 (Table 2). Mobile
P concentrations had greater variation in cores
collected from shallow, mid-depth, and deeper areas
of the lake (Fig. 2). The cumulative amount of mobile
P mass increased in a linear manner with increasing
sediment depth in these three cores and was substantially
greater in deeper areas of the lake (Fig. 3). The
cumulative amount of mobile P mass within the upper
16 cm of sediment was approximately two times
higher than the amount of mobile P within the top
5 cm of sediment in the shallow area, and this ratio
increased to nearly three-fold at the mid-depth and the
deep sites in the lake.
Mean, surficial (uppermost 10 cm) sediment concentrations
of Al before treatment ranged from 5.8 to
6.5 mg g-1 (N = 3), with a mean and standard deviation
of 5.9 and 0.57 mg g-1, respectively. Surficial
sediment bulk density (wet) was also similar between
experimental sites, averaging 1.13 (±0.01) g m-3 in the
enclosures and non-enclosure areas and ranging from
1.12 to 1.14 g cm-3 within the individual cores
(Table 2). Other physical properties in the sediment
were also similar between exclosure and non-exclosure
sites prior to treatment (Table 2). The effective fetch for
all coring locations was short and similar (exclosures
= 0.29 km, other locations = 0.34 km ± 0.11).The concentration of mobile sediment P decreased
mainly due to conversion to AlñP, and both Al and Alñ
P were elevated in surficial sediment 152 days after
addition of alum (Fig. 4). As expected, addition of
alum resulted in a distinct layer of elevated Al in
surficial sediment with peak concentrations ranging
from 13 to 18 mg g-1 in the exclosures and from 7 to
11 mg g-1 in other areas of the lake outside of the
exclosures (Online Resource 1). Mean values (mass)
of added Al detected in the sediment from inside the
enclosures and other sites outside the exclosures were
36 and 44 g Al m-2, respectively, and seemingly
reflected the quantity of Al applied during treatment
(39 g m-2). Even though the total mass of excess Al
detected was similar among experimental areas, the
depth penetration of Al into the sediment was
substantially less within carp exclosures at the end of
the experiment. Excess Al was found at an average
sediment depth of approximately 5.0 (±1.2) cm within
the exclosures, whereas it was detected more than 2.5
times deeper in the sediment (13 ± 3.7 cm) outside
the exclosures (Fig. 5). If a less stringent, one standard
deviation was used (i.e., 110% of background), the
depth of excess Al penetration reached 16 cm outside the exclosures, more than a threefold increase. This
difference in mean mixing depth was statistically
significant when comparing the exclosures and nonenclosure
sites in both cases (MannñWhitney rank
sum test, P\0.01). There was no significant difference
when we compared only the three sites exposed
to carp bioturbation (ANOVA, P = 0.93).
When the 2.5-fold increase in sediment mixing
depth associated with carp (using the two standard
deviation limit for excess Al) was taken into consideration,
it was found that the total mobile sediment P
pool potentially available for release increased by
55ñ92%, depending on location within the lake
(Fig. 5). If the less stringent, one standard deviation
was used to estimate excess Al and increased sediment
mixing depth (16 cm, see Fig. 5), the amount of
potentially available P caused by carp bioturbation
was 109ñ198% greater than if carp were absent.
xdiscussion
The addition of alum to Kohlman Lake to reduce
internal sediment P release provided an opportunity to
test the effect of common carp on sediment mixing and
the potential availability of sediment P in shallow
lakes. Significant differences in depth penetration of
added Al were detected when comparing sediment
from areas with and without carp. It was reasonable to
use Al concentrations in the sediment as a tracer for
sediment mixing depth due to the inert nature of the
Al(OH)3, which forms in water with circum-neutral pH
(Stumm & Morgan, 1996). Numerous studies show
that Al added from treatment is stabile and can be
detected many decades after treatment in both shallow
and deep lakes (Rydin et al., 2000; Lewandowski et al.,
2003; Huser et al., 2011; Huser, 2012). The results
presented herein are the first measurements of the
likely influence of free-ranging adult carp on sediment
mixing and changes to sediment P potentially available
for release in a shallow lake using definitive biochemical
techniques after alum treatment.
Carp burrowing and sediment mixing depth
Although the effects of benthivorous fish on sediment
mixing depth and P availability have been relatively
poorly documented to date, this study clearly shows
that free-ranging carp can dig deeply in lake sediment.
In laboratory settings, carp have been shown to be the
deepest burrowing species among European minnows
(Nikolsky, 1963). Even relatively small (\30 cm)
individuals have been shown to be able to dig up to
15 cm into the sediment. Others studies have shown
that mixing depth in systems inhabited by carp and
bream (Abramis brama) can be as high as 12 cm
(Alikunhi, 1966), with bream appearing to be even
stronger sediment burrowers than carp. Ritvo et al.
(2004) found that carp burrow only 3ñ5 cm into the
sediment of aquaculture ponds; however, the bulk
density of sediment in the ponds was very high and not
typical of sediment found in shallow, productive lakes
(Ha∞kanson & Jansson, 1983). Unfortunately, very
little information is available from previous carp
studies about physical sediment properties or the
amount of potentially available P in sediment.
Size and density of carp are likely to affect
sediment mixing depth caused by foraging (Zambrano
et al., 2001). The size (mean weight 3.4 kg) and
biomass (180 kg ha-1) of carp in Kohlman Lake were
similar to other studies where significant habitat
alteration occurred, resulting in changes to suspended
sediment, nutrients, and plant communities (Zambrano
& Hinojosa, 1999; Williams et al., 2002; Haas
et al., 2007; Bajer et al., 2009). Although wind and
wave action can affect sediment mixing in lakes, carp
was likely the primary driver of increased sediment
mixing depth in this study. Effective fetch for all
coring locations was similar (exclosures = 0.29 km,
other locations = 0.34 km ? 0.11) and short
(\0.5 km), meaning that the study areas were not
likely to be substantially affected by wind and wave action (Ha∞kanson & Jansson, 1983). The predominant
wind direction was from the southwest, thus the north
site and the exclosures were likely to have the longest
fetch, whereas the south and southwest sites had the
shortest. Considering that there was no significant
difference in mixing depth between the north, south,
and southwest sites, it seems that wind played little
role in the different mixing depths detected between
the exclosures and non-exclosure areas. In addition,
substantial wind-driven sediment disturbance would
be more likely to redistribute the low-density Al(OH)3
floc to deeper areas of the lake (Huser et al., 2011). The
fact that we found uniform and similar amounts of Al
in Kohlman Lake sediment (36ñ44 g Al m-2) compared
to the applied dose (39 g Al m-2) 5 months
after treatment lends support to low wind-driven
sediment disturbance or mixing.
Benthic invertebrates are also known to increase the
active layer of sediment (Ada¥mek & Mars?a¥lek, 2012),
in some cases by up to 10 cm in low-density sediment
(Andersson et al., 1988). High biomass densities of
carp, however, can suppress macroinvertebrate abundance
by up to 70% through feeding (Miller & Crowl,
2006). Thus, the differences in sediment mixing depth
between the exclosures and other lake areas are likely
conservative due to the potential for greater benthic
invertebrate abundance inside the exclosures. It should
also be noted that there was a brief period while the lake
was being treated (2 days) before the exclosures were
installed when carp might have affected mixing depth.
The results presented herein are thus conservative.
Changes in mobile P mass related to sediment
mixing depth
When applying the increase in mixing depth caused by
carp bioturbation to the mass of mobile P present in
Kohlman Lake sediment, the amount of mobile P
potentially available for release increased by 55%
(shallow areas) to 92% (deeper areas approximately
2.0ñ2.7 m) based on the more stringent two standard
deviation method used to estimate excess sediment Al
from alum treatment. Because the mobile P pool,
along with physicochemical conditions at the sedimentñ
water interface, contributes directly to internal P
loading (Pilgrim et al., 2007), the increase in mobile P
mass exposed to the water column due to carp
burrowing may have a substantial long-term impact
on nutrient availability in the lake after Al treatment.
These are the first empirical, lake-wide measurements
of sediment P availability due to carp bioturbation and
they support studies showing significant effects of carp
on TP concentration in lake water e.g., (Breukelaar
et al., 1994; Angeler et al., 2002; Parkos et al., 2003;
Schrage & Downing, 2004; Chumchal et al., 2005;
Akhurst et al., 2012; Fischer et al., 2013). Other
studies, however, have found only subtle or no
relationship between carp and changes in water
column nutrients (e.g., Roberts et al., 1995; Egertson
& Downing, 2004; Matsuzaki et al., 2007; Roozen
et al., 2007; Bajer & Sorensen, 2015). These inconsistencies
may be due to a number of factors including
fish age/size (Driver et al., 2005), sediment composition
(Ritvo et al., 2004), and food availability (Zambrano
et al., 2001). For example, high densities of carp
may limit overall food availability (Zambrano et al.,
2001), leading to increased energy spent searching for
food that will likely contribute to increased sediment
disturbance and mixing. While theoretical calculations
suggest that carp bioturbation may be a major process
affecting P availability in lakes, especially those with
low density, organic rich sediments, whole-lake carp
biomass removals are needed to better quantify this
process (Bajer & Sorensen, 2015).
Lake management concerns
Increased sediment mixing and mobile P mass in the
active sediment layer caused by carp bioturbation are
likely to have implications for most management
methods designed to reduce internal P loading in
lakes. Although the alum applied to Kohlman Lake
was successful at reducing mobile sediment P concentration
via conversion to AlñP in surficial sediment
in the short term, the increased sediment mixing depth
caused by carp may reduce the longevity of treatment.
The main reason for this is that the Al dose added to
the lake was based on the mass of mobile P in the
upper 6ñ10 cm of sediment (a slight over-estimate of
sediment mixing without carp of 5 cm). This would
have been adequate to bind mobile P in the active
sediment layer if there had not been carp in the lake,
but with carp the active layer of sediment is at least 2.5
times higher, leading to an increase of mobile
sediment P (potentially available for release) of at
least 55% in the active layer. Because this increase
was not accounted for in dosing calculations, the
positive water quality effects from treatment may last less than the estimated 15-year longevity. The additional
mobile P may eventually overwhelm the Al
added to the sediment, resulting in a return of elevated
internal P loading in the lake. Thus, internal P loading
management methods (e.g., Al addition, dredging,
etc.) may need to be altered in order to achieve desired
effectiveness in lakes with moderate to high densities
of carp.
The release rate of mobile P from sediment might
not change substantially when carp are present even
though the total amount of P potentially available for
release will increase due to the increase in the active
sediment layer, which is a key issue. This is because
sediment P release rate is largely a function of average
mobile P mass by depth under anoxic conditions
(Pilgrim et al., 2007), and not the total amount of
mobile P mass in the active layer. We show a clear
increase in the sediment active layer caused by carp
(from 5 to between 13.5 and 16 cm), resulting in an
increase of the total mass of P (g m-2) in the active
layer that is potentially available for release, depending
on in-lake conditions. The average mass of mobile
P by depth (g m-2 cm-1, data not shown) throughout
the upper 16 cm is generally constant, however,
meaning that the sediment P release rate may not be
affected by an increase in mixing depth. This may be
another reason why some studies show small or even
non-significant changes to water column TP when carp
are present (Roberts et al., 1995; Egertson & Downing,
2004; Matsuzaki et al., 2007; Roozen et al., 2007;
Bajer & Sorensen, 2015). If, however, bioturbation
results in migration of mobile P from deeper layers
towards the surficial sediment, increasing the average
mass in the upper sediment layers, the internal P
loading rate might be expected to increase. A distinction
should be made, however, between P released
from inorganic compounds (e.g., loosely bound P and
FeñP) and release of P contained in organic matter.
Carp bioturbation has the potential to increase the total
amount available for release from both sediment P
forms due to the increase in mixing depth, but more
research is needed to elucidate the relationship
between increased sediment mixing, oxygen availability,
and mineralization of organic matter in deeper
sediment layers and how these factors contribute to the
release of sediment P (from both organic and inorganic
P forms) to the water column in the presence of carp.
One possible benefit from carp bioturbation, which
also deserves further investigation, is an apparent
increase in the short-term binding effectiveness
between Al and P in the presence of carp. The ratio
of Al to AlñP in Kohlman Lake sediment averaged
approximately 30 just 5 months after treatment,
whereas an average Al:AlñP ratio of 87 was found in
nearby Lake Calhoun sediment after 15 months
(Huser & Pilgrim, 2014) even though Al doses to
both lakes were similar (39 and 42 g Al m-2, respectively).
The lower Al:AlñP ratio detected in Kohlman
Lake indicates carp mixing may increase the potential
for contact between sediment P and the added Al,
potentially increasing the effectiveness of treatment
by decreasing the reduction in binding efficiency that
can occur when Al is allowed to age (crystalize) in the
absence of P (de Vicente et al., 2008). Other factors
that should eventually be addressed with respect to
carp effects on sediment P availability and Al
treatment efficacy are sediment biogeochemistry,
including pH and oxygen availability, and both mixing
and thermocline effects. In sum, this study sheds new
light not only on the complexity of properly dosing Al
treatments, but also on the significant role that carp
have on sediment mixing and potential sediment P
availability in lakes.