xabstract
We analyzed a data series on nutrients, phytoplankton, zooplankton, and young-of-the-year fish from Oneida
Lake, New York, to test several hypotheses relating the response of the pelagic food web to grazing by zebra mussels
(Dreissena polymorpha). System-wide grazing rates increased by one to two orders of magnitude after zebra mussel introduction.
The most dramatic change associated with dreissenid grazing was increased water clarity and overall decrease
in algal biovolume and Chl a. Contrary to predictions, primary production did not decline. We attribute the lack
of whole water column decline in primary productivity to the compensating effect of increased water clarity resulting
in deeper penetration of photosynthetically active radiation. We observed no change in total or dissolved phosphorus
concentrations. Although algal standing crop declined, Daphnia spp. biomass and production did not, but dominance
shifted from Daphnia galeata mendotae to Daphnia pulicaria. Consistent with our findings in the lower food web, we
found no evidence that zebra mussels had a negative impact on young yellow perch (Perca flavescens) growth, biomass,
or production. Thus, despite the order of magnitude increase in grazing rates and associated decrease in algal
biomass, pelagic production at primary, secondary, and tertiary levels did not decline in association with zebra mussels.



xintroduction


The most prevalent perturbation to aquatic ecosystems that
is mediated through anthropogenic vectors is the introduction
of exotic species (e.g., Mills et al. 1994). To date,
146 nonindigenous species have been recorded as established
in the Laurentian Great Lakes alone (Mills et al.
1994), and many studies have focused on the impact of these
exotics on associated ecosystems (e.g., Strayer et al. 1999). In
particular, the recent invasion of the zebra mussel (Dreissena
polymorpha) in North American freshwater lakes and rivers
has caused concern because of their high filtration capacity
and their ability to alter food web structure (e.g., Padilla et
al. 1996; Caraco et al. 1997).In this study, we analyzed a data series on nutrients,
phytoplankton, zooplankton, and young-of-the-year (YOY)
yellow perch (Perca flavescens) from Oneida Lake, New
York, to test several hypotheses relating the response of a
food web to grazing by zebra mussels. The importance of
these processes will vary seasonally. Specifically, we hypothesized
that (i) total phosphorus (TP) will not decrease
but will be partitioned into more soluble reactive phosphorus
(SRP) and less total particulate phosphorus (TPP) due to the
lower algal biomass in the water column (Heath et al. 1995;
Mellina et al. 1995; Caraco et al. 1997); other dissolved
nutrients (nitrate, silica) will be less affected because phosphorus
is the limiting nutrient (Johengen et al. 1995);
(ii) phytoplankton biomass (as chlorophyll a (Chl a)) will
decrease, leading to a decrease in primary productivity and
an increase in water clarity (Holland 1993; Fahnenstiel et al.
1995; Caraco et al. 1997), and phytoplankton community
composition will shift to grazer-resistant forms, such as
large cyanobacteria or large diatoms (Smith et al. 1998);
(iii) daphnid biomass and production will decline due to reduction
in algal biomass and production, and the shift to
larger inedible forms of phytoplankton will further inhibit
daphnid production (Karatayev et al. 1997; Pace et al. 1998);
and (iv) decreased daphnid biomass and production will lead
to declines in YOY fish biomass and individual specific
growth (Rutherford et al. 1999).
While we hypothesized that changes in the pelagic lower
trophic levels were zebra mussel induced, two alternative hypotheses
explaining a decrease in phytoplankton and associated
changes in other trophic levels are also possible:
(i) reduced phosphorus loading causes a decrease in phytoplankton
biomass [as Chl a], daphnid biomass and production,
and YOY fish biomass and an increase in water clarity
(nutrient limitation: bottom-up effect) or (ii) decreased
planktivory by fish (unrelated to zebra mussels) increase
zooplankton biomass leading to a decrease in both Chl a and
primary productivity with TP remaining stable (trophic cascade:
top-down effect).

xmethods



Oneida Lake is a 20 700-ha, shallow, productive lake (mean
depth 6.8 m, maximum depth 16 m) located on the Lake Ontario
Plain of central New York State (Mills et al. 1978). The lake is
well mixed and generally isothermal during the ice-free months.
The lake has been described as naturally eutrophic, with TP concentrations
typically ranging between 30 and 60 mg∑Lñ1 during the
1970s (Mills et al. 1987). Centric diatom blooms (Cyclotella spp.)
typically have dominated early-spring phytoplankton communities,
whereas cyanobacteria blooms (mainly Aphanizomenon flos-aquae)
persist for 1 or 2 months in late summer (Greeson 1971). The zooplankton
community has been dominated by two daphnid species,
Daphnia pulicaria and Daphnia galeata mendotae, with smaller
populations of Daphnia retrocurva (Mills et al. 1987). The dominant
zooplanktivores are YOY fish; at high densities, YOY yellow
perch are able to collapse the daphnid population (Mills and Forney
1983). Populations of gizzard shad (Dorosoma cepedianum) expanded
in 1984 and impacted daphnid populations from the mid-
1980s to the early 1990s (Roseman et al. 1996; Shepherd and Mills
1996). Zebra mussels were first observed in Oneida Lake in 1991,
and by autumn 1992, the population reached densities as high as
44 000 individuals∑mñ2 (Mellina et al. 1995)Limnological data were collected weekly at five sites (1975ñ
1997) from April to November (Fig. 1). Sampling was conducted
monthly during the winter ice-cover period (at the reference site,
Shackelton Pt.; see Fig. 1). A tygon tube (2.5-cm inner diameter)
was used to collect integrated water samples (surface to 0.5 m
above lake bottom) for phytoplankton and nutrients. Within 2ñ4 h
after collection, samples were filtered for Chl a, SRP, total soluble
phosphorus (TSP), nitrate-nitrogen (NO3), and soluble reactive silica
as SiO4 (SRS) (Strickland and Parsons 1972; American Public
Health Association et al. 1976). Filtered samples were stored at a
temperature of approximately ñ20∞C prior to analysis. Unfiltered
water was used to estimate TP. Dissolved organic phosphorus
(DOP) was estimated as the difference between SRP and TSP and
TPP as the difference between TSP and TP. Total alkalinity and
phenolphthalein alkalinity of water with known pH were used to
determine dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) (Wetzel and Likens
1991).
Number of clear-water days was defined as the period between
the spring and summer algae blooms when Chl a was less than
3 mg∑Lñ1 for at least 2 consecutive weeks. In situ water column
irradiance was measured with a LI-COR 4p sensor and LI-COR
1000 data logger at 0.25-m intervals from the surface to the bottom;
above-surface irradiance was measured with a LI-COR 2p
sensor attached to the same data logger.
Subsamples of integrated lake water from each site for
phytoplankton analysis were immediately fixed in Lugolís solution
upon collection and later identified and enumerated using a Wild
inverted microscope. Identification was to species when possible;
otherwise, phytoplankton cells were identified to genus. Biovolume
estimates were determined with the use of a BASIC program (N.
Idrisi, unpublished data) using average shapes and sizes for individual
algal species (Reynolds 1984). All limnological, phytoplankton,
and zooplankton samples were integrated over depth;
thus, estimates represent water column mean values.Integrated water samples were collected for 14C photosynthesis
incubations using the Fee incubator technique (Shearer et al. 1985;
Fee 1990). Irradiance was measured with a LI-COR 4p sensor
from the surface to the bottom to determine extinction coefficients
used in calculating primary productivity. Photosyntheticñirradiance
(PI) experimental procedures were modified following Lewis and
Smith (1983) and Fahnenstiel et al. (1995). Modifications included
the incubation of a smaller sample volume (3 mL) and a 40-min incubation
period. Differences in 14C uptake between the two procedures
were minor (Lang and Fahnenstiel 1995). Water samples
were kept cool in opaque 10-L containers and transferred to the
laboratory for subsequent processing; time from collection of the
first sample to the return to the laboratory was typically 2 h. Prior
to initial experimentation, a spectral distribution analysis was carried
out at the three sampling sites with a LI-COR 1800 underwater
spectroradiometer on May 18, 1993, to determine the spectral
quality of the euphotic zone. A colored gel, matching the spectral
distribution data, was placed at the bottom of the Fee incubator
(also called a photosynthetron) between the light source and the
samples to act as a filter, allowing the penetration of light wavelengths
similar to those in the field.
The PI curves were fitted from photosynthetic rates at specific
irradiances using the simplex nonlinear curve fitting routine in
Systat 5.03 (SystatÆ). Two PI parameters were determined, Pm and
a, from the equation (Gallegos and Platt 1981)where P(I) is photosynthetic rate (milligrams carbon per hour) at
irradiance I (einsteins per square metre per hour), Pm is maximum
photosynthetic rate (milligrams carbon per hour), and a is the initial
linear slope at irradiance I (milligrams carbon per einstein per
square metre).
Primary productivity was estimated with the computer programs
developed by Fee (1990) using the PI parameters per unit chlorophyll
(PB
m (milligrams carbon per milligram Chl a per hour) and aB
(milligrams carbon per milligram Chl a per einstein per square
metre)), extinction coefficients, and latitude and Julian day as input
parameters. Primary productivity for years other than 1993 and
1994 was estimated using the empirical models developed in Idrisi
(1997). These models, based on primary productivity measurements
in 1993ñ1994, explained 73 and 47% of the variation for Pm
and a, respectively (Idrisi 1997). The models were verified against
independent data from 1988, where errors between observed and
predicted PI parameters were less than 5% (Idrisi 1997).Zooplankton samples were collected (at the same time and locations
as the limnological and phytoplankton collections) with a
153-mm-mesh Nylon net (0.5-m mouth diameter, 2 m in length) using
vertical tows from approximately 0.5 m off the sediment surface
to the water surface. Daphnia pulicaria and D. galeata
mendotae were enumerated and body length recorded with the use
of a computer-assisted plankton analysis system (Hambright and
Fridman 1994). Individual weights were calculated from length ñ
dry weight regressions (E.L. Mills, unpublished data). Numbers of
eggs per female were counted for D. pulicaria and D. galeata
mendotae to estimate secondary production from 1988 to 1996 according
to the method of Borgmann et al. (1984). Annual average
clearance rates of daphnid populations (D. pulicaria and
D. galeata mendotae) were predicted for the whole data set (1975ñ
1997) from multivariate regressions from Peters and Downing
(1984). Annual averages were calculated for the period Aprilñ
October for each year using eq. 4 from Peters and Downing
(1984). Input data included daphnid dry weights, food concentration
(wet weight converted from Chl a), nanoplankton biovolumes,
nanoplankton biovolumes per individual daphnid for 1975ñ1995,
median biovolume, and biovolume per individual daphnid from Peters
and Downing (1984) were used for 1996ñ1997.Dreissenids were collected by SCUBA using 0.5- to 1-m2 quadrats
placed randomly at each of 10 sites in triplicate (see fig. 1 in
Mellina et al. 1995). Samples were collected in October of each
year from 1992 to 1997; only nine sites were sampled in 1995. All
individuals collected throughout this sampling period were
D. polymorpha. Lake-wide wet weight biomass (including shell)
means ± 95% confidence intervals were calculated by stratifying
samples by substrate type (soft, sand, and hard substrates; Greeson
1971). Abundances and size frequency distributions were estimated
for each substrate type and lake-wide estimates made by weighting
abundances based on the total area of each substrate type (Cochran
1977). Because zebra mussels were not observed on any substrates
deeper than 10 m, lake-wide values were corrected by assigning
zero abundance for total lake bottom at depths exceeding 10 m.
Annual zebra mussel clearance rates of the Oneida Lake zebra
mussel population were estimated using the equations of Horgan
and Mills (1997). Clearance rates were estimated as weightspecific
rates based on zebra mussel dry weights (soft tissue only).
We assumed that Oneida Lake was generally isothermal and well
mixed during the ice-free season, and therefore, zebra mussels
would have access to the entire water column. Daily clearance
rates for zebra mussels were corrected for differential filtering activity
between day and night (Horgan and Mills 1997).Abundance of a primary zooplanktivore (yellow perch) was estimated
using high-speed Miller samplers (540-mm-mesh net) in
June and a 5.5-m otter bottom trawl from the end of July through
October each year (1975ñ1997). Miller sampling was conducted
when YOY yellow perch attained approximately 18 mm total
length (VanDeValk et al. 1999). By the end of July, YOY yellow
perch typically become demersal and vulnerable to bottom trawls
(Forney 1971). Weekly estimates of YOY yellow perch from the
end of July through October were obtained from trawls fished at 10
sites each week. Average daily biomass was calculated from the
decline in abundance in trawl samples and observed growth rates.
For the pelagic period, abundance was calculated assuming a constant
instantaneous mortality rate between the date of the Miller
sampling survey and the end of July (Mills et al. 1987). Average
weight of YOY yellow perch in October trawls was considered to To determine the effect of zebra mussels on the lower food web,
we used data from June to October of each year. This time period
is when water temperature was above 10∞C, and zebra mussels
would most likely have the greatest impact on the system. Laboratory
experiments have determined that feeding activity by
D. polymorpha occurs at a temperature range of 8ñ25∞C
(Stanczykowska 1977); summer temperatures in Oneida Lake did
not exceed 25∞C during the period when zebra mussels were present.
We divided the data set into pre-zebra mussel phase (1988ñ
1991) and post-zebra mussel phase (1992ñ1997; we use 1992ñ
1995 for phytoplankton biovolumes and primary productivity and
1992ñ1996 for daphnid production); we also grouped data for each
year by season (spring, summer, and autumn). In our analysis, we
did not want to confound nutrient effects with zebra mussel impacts.
Consequently, we chose to begin our data analysis with
1988, since TP concentrations from 1988 to 1997 were stable;
interannual differences in TP were 10ñ30 mg∑Lñ1 for 1975ñ1987
compared with a maximum difference of 10 mg∑Lñ1 since 1988
(Fig. 2). We used a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test
for significant differences between pre- and post-zebra mussel periods
followed by a comparison of means for zebra mussel phases
within each season (SAS Institute Inc. 1989). When the criterion
for normality was not met, we log transformed the data prior to
analysis. Comparisons were considered significant at P < 0.05.
xresults



We estimated mean areal densities and wet weight of zebra
mussels for each year based on numbers and weights of
individuals in shell size categories ranging from <2 to
30 mm (Fig. 3). Our results indicate that mean shell length
increased over the period from 2.75 (1992) to 8.72 mm
(1997), maximum mean shell length was in 1995 (9.75 mm),
and shell length frequencies shifted from bimodal (1992ñ
1994) to a single mode (1995ñ1997). In 1992, a high abundance
of small mussels (<2 mm) contributed to the highest
lake-wide mean density (>40 000∑mñ2) observed in this
study. In contrast, the highest mean wet weight (including
shell) of mussels was observed in 1997 (1560 g∑mñ2) compared
with average weights ranging from 343 to 1012 g∑mñ2
from 1992 to 1996. As might be expected, site-to-site variance
was high; coefficient of variation among sites ranged
from 84% in 1993 to 206% in 1997. Mussel densities at individual
sites ranged from zero to a high of 114 300∑mñ2and, likewise, site-to-site differences in mussel biomass (as
wet weight including shell) ranged from zero to 11 276 g∑mñ2.
Highest mussel densities were generally observed at 3 m
depth, decreasing in density to depths of 7 m. No mussels
were found beyond depths of 10 m.We hypothesized that TP would not decline in the presence
of zebra mussels but that its constituents would shift to
more SRP and less TPP. Other major nutrients such as NO3
and SRS would exhibit minimal, if any, change. Consistent
with our hypothesis, we found (using a two-way ANOVA)
that there was no significant difference in mean TP concentrations
in pre- and post-zebra mussel years (Table 1). While
SRP concentrations did not increase in the presence of zebra
mussels, there was a significant decline in TPP (two-way
ANOVA, P < 0.05). Annual averages of NO3 and SRS concentrations
exhibited no significant change in the presence
of zebra mussels (Table 1).
Distributions of phosphorus and other nutrients varied significantly
by season from spring to summer to autumn; TP,
SRP, TPP, DOP, and SRS increased from spring to autumn,
whereas NO3 declined over the same period (Fig. 4). Comparison
of phosphorus concentrations by zebra mussel phase
and by season indicated that TPP was consistently lower in
post-zebra mussel years for all seasons, whereas SRP and
TP concentrations were lower only in summer and autumn.
NO3 was significantly lower in autumn, while SRS was
lower in summer during zebra mussel years (Fig. 4).We hypothesized that grazing by zebra mussels would
lead to increased water clarity, decreased phytoplankton biomass
and primary productivity, and a shift in algal composition
to grazer-resistant forms. As expected, Secchi depth
increased significantly (two-way ANOVA, P < 0.05) and Chl
a decreased significantly (two-way ANOVA, P < 0.05) in the
presence of zebra mussels (Table 1; Figs. 4g and 4h). The
lowest annual average Chl a concentration was recorded in
1993 and 1997 (4.9 and 4.7 mg∑Lñ1, respectively); Chl a was
46% lower in post-zebra mussel years. For the years 1993ñ
1997, the annual average Secchi depth was consistently
greater than that for previous years (Fig. 5a). Although the
number of clear water days (defined as the period when
mean water column Chl a was <3 mg∑Lñ1) increased from 60 ±
16 to 86 ± 4 days, the difference was not significant (t test,
P > 0.05). This statistical outcome was likely due to the prolonged
clear-water period in 1989 that extended beyond any
post-zebra mussel year (Fig. 5b).
We found significant (two-way ANOVA, P < 0.05) zebra
mussel effects by season for Secchi depth and Chl a but not
for primary production (Table 1; Fig. 4). Secchi depth was
greater and Chl a lower during post-zebra mussel years for
all seasons (Figs. 4g and 4h). Primary productivity did not
differ significantly (two-way ANOVA, P > 0.05) by season
or zebra mussel presenceñabsence; however, higher mean
primary production estimates were observed in the autumn
and lower estimates in the summer in years when zebra mussels
were present (Fig. 4i).
Primary productivity did not decline significantly during
the post-zebra mussel period in spite of the significant reduction
in Chl a (34% reduction from pre-zebra mussel Chl
a concentrations) (Table 1; Fig. 4i). Primary productivity can
be maintained with declining algal biomass if there is a compensatory
increase in photosynthetic rate per unit chlorophyll
(no observed differences in primary productivity
between the two periods; t test, P = 0.383). This can occur
through shifts in the PI curves or increase in light penetration.
Extinction coefficient (kD) values were significantly
higher during the pre-zebra mussel period compared with
post-zebra mussel years (0.742 ± 0.03 mñ1, and 0.564 ±
0.046 mñ1, respectively; t test, P < 0.05). Both aB and PB
m increased
from pre- to post-zebra mussel years (aB = 14.08 ±
1.68 and 20.28 ± 6.15 mg C∑mg Chl añ1∑einsteinñ1∑mñ2,
respectively; PB
m = 6.53 ± 1.24 and 7.49 ± 1.2 mg C∑mg
Chl añ1∑hñ1, respectively); however, these differences were
insignificant.
Consistent with trends in Chl a, total phytoplankton biovolume
in all seasons declined significantly after the zebra mussel invasion (Table 1). Associated with this decline was
a shift in algal composition; the phytoplankton community
structure shifted from a pre-zebra mussel community dominated
by diatoms (1988ñ1990) to a community dominated
by cyanobacteria (1992 and 1994), chlorophytes (1993), and
diatoms (1995) (Fig. 6a). The phytoplankton community in
1991 was codominated by diatoms, cyanobacteria, and
chlorophytes (Fig. 6a). The transitional year, 1992, was
dominated by cyanobacteria but also had a higher proportion
of nanoplankton than any pre-zebra mussel year (Fig. 6b).
The nanoplankton (chlorophytes and cryptophytes) dominated
the phytoplankton community in 1993, but this was
followed by a dramatic decline in 1994.
Netplankton biovolume followed a trend similar to that of
total phytoplankton and varied significantly with zebra mussel
phase (Table 1; Fig. 7b). In contrast, nanoplankton did not
vary significantly by zebra mussel phase in summer and autumn
but did so in spring; the major difference in the spring
was the dominance of the diatom Cyclotella spp. during the
pre-zebra mussel period (Fig. 7c). Cyanobacteria biovolumes
were not significantly different in the presence or absence of
zebra mussels (Table 1; Fig. 7d). Diatom and chrysophyte
biovolumes both declined significantly in the presence of zebra
mussels, being most pronounced in the spring and autumn
(Table 1; Figs. 7e and 7g). Diatoms recovered to pre-zebra
mussel state in 1995 (Fig. 6a). Chrysophytes were extremely
rare during the post-zebra mussel period in all seasons
(Figs. 6a and 7g). Chlorophytes and cryptomonads were
most abundant in summer during the clear-water phase;
however, neither taxon varied significantly by zebra mussel
phase or season (Table 1; Figs. 7f and 7h).We hypothesized that daphnid biomass would decline in
response to a decline in algal biomass and production. Daphnia
pulicaria and D. galeata mendotae were the two dominant
zooplankton species throughout the study period, accounting
for more than 50% of the total zooplankton community biomass
(Fig. 8b). Daphnia pulicaria, the larger of the two species, dominated the post-zebra mussel period, while
D. galeata mendotae dominated the pre-zebra mussel period.
Consistent with the dominance of the large-bodied
D. pulicaria in post-zebra mussel years was a shift to a
higher mean length of crustacean zooplankton (Fig. 8a).
Mean zooplankton length was significantly (two-way
ANOVA, P = 0.001) higher (39%) in years when zebra mussels
were present (Fig. 9a). In spite of a shift to the larger
D. pulicaria in post-zebra mussel years, total zooplankton
biomass did not change significantly pre- and post-zebra
mussels (Table 1). However, total zooplankton biomass was
significantly greater (two-way ANOVA, P < 0.01) postzebra
mussels in the summer and significantly greater (twoway
ANOVA, P < 0.005) pre-zebra mussels in the spring
(Fig. 9b).
Mean annual D. pulicaria biomass and production were
significantly higher in years when zebra mussels were present
(Table 1; highest production estimates were in summer).
Egg production may be a good indicator of feeding condition
(e.g., see Pace et al. 1998 and references therein). We
observed no effect of zebra mussels on combined
D. pulicaria and D. galeata mendotae egg ratios (0.49 ±
0.165 and 0.502 ± 0.077 egg∑individualñ1 for pre- and postzebra
mussel years, respectively). This suggests similar
feeding conditions for daphnids in pre- and post-zebra mussel
periods.
Daphnia galeata mendotae exhibited no significant seasonal
variation in either biomass or production but did exhibit
a significant difference by zebra mussel presenceñ
absence (Table 1). Biomass and production of this daphnid
were higher in years when zebra mussels were absent; the
lowest biomass and production were in the autumn during
these same years (Figs. 9e and 9f). In post-zebra mussel
years, biomass and production of D. galeata mendotae
peaked in summer (Figs. 9e and 9f)The most dramatic change in Oneida Lake post-zebra
mussels was the temporal duration and depth of water clarity,
reflected in Secchi depth and the number of clear-water
days and the overall decrease in algal biovolume and Chl a
(Figs. 4, 5, and 7). We attempted to determine if these
changes were associated with clearance rates of zebra mussels
and (or) daphnids. Estimated weight-specific zebra mussel
clearance rates were highest in 1995 and corresponded to
the highest mean shell length (9.75 mm) (Table 2; Fig. 3).
Zebra mussel population clearance (as percentage of lake
cleared per day) increased to its highest level (2.5 times total
lake volume cleared per day) in 1997 when the population
reached its highest biomass (Table 2; Fig. 3). In spite of a
generally higher weight-specific clearance rate of daphnids
compared with zebra mussels, daphnid population clearance
rates never exceeded 8% of lake cleared per day (Table 2).We hypothesized that YOY yellow perch biomass, growth,
and production would decline in response to negative zebra
mussel impacts on Daphnia spp. (also see Mayer et al.
2000). However, consistent with our findings at lower
trophic levels, we observed no significant effects of zebra
mussels on biomass, growth, and production of YOY yellow
perch (comparisons of the years 1988ñ1991 and 1992ñ1997:
two-way ANOVA, P > 0.3) (Tables 1 and 3). Growth rates
indexed as weight in October ranged from 4.2 to 5.8 g in
1988ñ1991 (mean 5.2 ± 0.36 g) and from 4.5 to 8.7 g in
1992ñ1997 (mean 6.0 ± 0.59 g). Biomass of YOY yellow
perch typically peak in JulyñAugust in Oneida Lake (Mills
et al. 1987), and this was also observed for both the pre- and
post-zebra mussel periods analyzed here. Production is
usually greater in MayñJuly, although neither biomass nor
production was significantly different between pre- and postzebra
mussel years (Tables 1 and 3).
xdiscussion

We hypothesized that TP would not decline but would be
partitioned into more SRP than TPP because of reductions in
algal biomass. We did not observe a decline in TP after the
establishment of zebra mussels, consistent with findings in
western Lake Erie (Holland et al. 1995). Contrary to our hypothesis,
however, we did not detect a significant increase in SRP or any change in DOP, although the DOP to TP ratio
increased significantly (0.218 ± 0.026 and 0.302 ± 0.02 preand
post-invasion, respectively; t test, P = 0.033) during
post-zebra mussel years. While these results are consistent
with those observed in Saginaw Bay (Johengen et al. 1995),
they differ from those of recent studies in the Hudson River
where SRP exhibited a significant increase (150%) and in
western Lake Erie where SRP increased by 17% (Holland et
al. 1995). In contrast with SRP, DOP concentrations were
higher in the autumn in years when zebra mussels were present
(but not in spring and summer). Heath et al. (1995)
found higher DOP concentrations in enclosures with high
densities of zebra mussels, although the results were confounded
due to unusually high concentrations in one of the
control enclosures. Short-term increases in phosphorus concentrations
have been shown in laboratory and mesocosm
experiments to be attributed to excretion by zebra mussels
(Heath et al. 1995; Mellina et al. 1995; Arnott and Vanni
1996). The influence of zebra mussel excretion on phosphorus
cycling, however, depends on zebra mussel population
size, size of individual mussels, and the relative concentration
of phosphorus in the water column (e.g., Heath et al.
1995; Mellina et al. 1995; Arnott and Vanni 1996); these
conditions may account for the different responses in phosphorus
dynamics among freshwater ecosystems. In any case,
the lack of change in TP in Oneida Lake suggests that potential
productivity has remained unchanged, and this finding
may help explain why production at other trophic levels exhibited
little or no change in response to zebra mussels.SRP or any change in DOP, although the DOP to TP ratio
increased significantly (0.218 ± 0.026 and 0.302 ± 0.02 preand
post-invasion, respectively; t test, P = 0.033) during
post-zebra mussel years. While these results are consistent
with those observed in Saginaw Bay (Johengen et al. 1995),
they differ from those of recent studies in the Hudson River
where SRP exhibited a significant increase (150%) and in
western Lake Erie where SRP increased by 17% (Holland et
al. 1995). In contrast with SRP, DOP concentrations were
higher in the autumn in years when zebra mussels were present
(but not in spring and summer). Heath et al. (1995)
found higher DOP concentrations in enclosures with high
densities of zebra mussels, although the results were confounded
due to unusually high concentrations in one of the
control enclosures. Short-term increases in phosphorus concentrations
have been shown in laboratory and mesocosm
experiments to be attributed to excretion by zebra mussels
(Heath et al. 1995; Mellina et al. 1995; Arnott and Vanni
1996). The influence of zebra mussel excretion on phosphorus
cycling, however, depends on zebra mussel population
size, size of individual mussels, and the relative concentration
of phosphorus in the water column (e.g., Heath et al.
1995; Mellina et al. 1995; Arnott and Vanni 1996); these
conditions may account for the different responses in phosphorus
dynamics among freshwater ecosystems. In any case,
the lack of change in TP in Oneida Lake suggests that potential
productivity has remained unchanged, and this finding
may help explain why production at other trophic levels exhibited
little or no change in response to zebra mussels.Observed changes in Secchi depth, Chl a, and phytoplankton
biovolume were consistent with our hypothesis that
phytoplankton biomass (and Chl a) would decline as water
clarity increased in response to grazing by zebra mussels, as
observed elsewhere (e.g., Holland 1993; Karatayev et al.
1997; Strayer et al. 1999). However, primary productivity
did not decline as predicted. Higher PI parameter values and
lower extinction coefficients may have compensated for low
chlorophyll concentrations.
Primary productivity cannot be maintained if algal biomass
declines unless there is a compensatory increase in
production per unit biomass (Fahnenstiel et al. 1995). This
in turn can be caused by an enhanced light environment or
by changes in the phytoplankton community to species with higher growth rates. In Oneida Lake, changes in PI parameters
between pre- and post-zebra mussel periods were in the
direction of higher efficiency per unit chlorophyll; also, increased
water clarity accounted for higher photosynthetic
rates below 5 m depth. For example, areal primary production
at Station B-125 on May 24, 1993, was 183 mg C∑mñ2;
using the proportional changes in PB
m, aB, kD, and Chl a that
occurred between pre- and post-zebra mussel years and assuming
20% variation to determine significant differences,
we find no change in areal primary production (184 mg
C∑mñ2) if Chl a is reduced to 65% of the original concentration.
The observed changes in parameters that affect primary
production require a reduction of Chl a by at least 50% in
order to produce a significant decline in primary production
(141 mg C∑mñ2). In other systems, the compensatory effects
of increased water clarity and photosynthesis were not sufficient
to compensate for the dramatic declines in Chl a concentration,
which were greater than those observed in
Oneida Lake (e.g., Fahnenstiel et al. 1995; Caraco et al.
1997). The degree of compensation will likely vary among
systems depending on the combination of factors, including
PI parameter values, light environment, phytoplankton species
composition, and Chl a concentration.
The response of algal communities to dreissenid grazing
varies among freshwater ecosystems (Smith et al. 1998;
Makarewicz et al. 1999). In Oneida Lake, a short-term shift
was observed in the phytoplankton community to more nanoplankton
(Chlorophyta, Cryptophyta, and Cyclotella spp.) and
less netplankton (Bacillariophyceae, Chrysophyceae, and Cyanobacteria).
However, annual variability was high, thus precluding
the observation of any clear trends in phytoplankton
dynamics over the long term. A clear shift, however, occurred
in the Hudson River where there was a marked decline
in cyanobacteria and a relative increase in diatoms
postinvasion (Smith et al. 1998). It is argued that the likely
cause for the relative increase of diatoms over cyanobacteria
(dominated by Microcystis spp. in the Hudson River) was
the differential growth rates of phytoplankton in response to
zebra mussel grazing (Smith et al. 1998).
On the other hand, Arnott and Vanni (1996) hypothesized
that low nitrogen to phosphorus ratios (a result of zebra
mussel excretion) could cause a shift in the phytoplankton
community to cyanobacteria due to nitrogen limitation. Although
we do not have nutrient data comparable with those
of Arnott and Vanni (1996), NO3 and SRP concentrations
indicate possible nitrogen limitation in Oneida Lake since
1985 during the summer and autumn. Consequently, latesummer
nitrogen limitation leading to cyanobacteria blooms
in Oneida Lake likely preceded the invasion by zebra mussels.
Makarewicz et al. (1999) found a significant increase in
cyanobacteria in the western basin of Lake Erie in the
spring, but this was followed by a significant decline in the
summer. There were no significant differences in cyanobacteria
biovolumes in all seasons analyzed in Oneida Lake.We predicted that zebra mussels would negatively impact
Daphnia spp. biomass and production in response to lower
algal food resources. Our findings do not support this hypothesis.
Although algal food resources declined, Daphnia
spp. biomass and production did not decline significantly.
We attribute the persistence of the daphnid community to
our observation that primary production did not change significantly
(probably due to increased water clarity; see
above) and that there was no shift to less edible algal species;
this result was also predicted in a simulation model
(Padilla et al. 1996). Pace et al. (1998) similarly found that
macrozooplankton did not significantly decline after the zebra
mussel invasion in the Hudson River. Microzooplankton
were significantly reduced in the Hudson River (Pace et al.
1998) but were not sampled efficiently with the 153-mmmesh
net used in Oneida Lake.
The daphnid species shift observed in Oneida Lake was
not studied in the Hudson River, although Pace et al. (1998)
speculated that a shift in species composition might have occurred.
Daphnia galeata mendotae tend to dominate in years
of high planktivory by fish in Oneida Lake (Mills and
Forney 1983). Large year-classes of gizzard shad occurred in
1990 and 1991, leading to high planktivory rates and a dominance
of D. galeata mendotae over D. pulicaria (Roseman et al. 1996; Shepherd and Mills 1996), but large numbers of
these fish were not observed post-1992 (VanDeValk et al.
1999). Larger daphnids may be better competitors at low
food levels (Gliwicz 1990), and this has been used to explain
the dominance of D. pulicaria in years when
planktivory rates are low (Rudstam et al. 1993). Zebra mussels
could induce low food levels, leading to the dominance
of D. pulicaria. However, in 1998 and 1999, D. galeata
mendotae was again the dominant species, even though algal
biomass did not increase (E.L. Mills, unpublished data).
In those years, a resurgence of emerald shiner (Notropis
atherinoides) and an associated increase in pelagic
planktivore biomass likely caused the shift back to the
smaller daphnid (VanDeValk et al. 1999). Thus, we believe
that the observed shift in Daphnia spp. composition associated
with zebra mussels was due to the concomitant decline
in open-water planktivory by gizzard shad rather than a zebra
mussel effect of reduced resources.Consistent with our observations in the daphnid community,
we did not detect a decrease in YOY yellow perch
growth, biomass, and production following the establishment
of zebra mussels. Mayer et al. (2000) reported an increase
in YOY yellow perch growth post-zebra mussels in
their study of Oneida Lake (1964ñ1997). Although we also
observed an increase in YOY yellow perch growth postzebra
mussels, this increase was not significant, probably because
the power of our analysis was lower (4 versus 27 prezebra
mussel years). Mayer et al. (2000) found increased
YOY yellow perch growth after accounting for densitydependent
effects and attributed such growth to increased
feeding efficiency on zooplankton (mainly daphnids) associated
with zebra mussel induced elevated water clarity. Increased
YOY yellow perch growth could not be attributed to
the presence of zebra mussel veligers. These veligers are
smaller (90ñ200 mm; Sprung 1993) than prey generally consumed
by larval yellow perch (Schael et al. 1991), and diet
analysis from two post-zebra mussel years showed no veligers
in YOY yellow perch diets (Mayer et al. 2000).
In conclusion, our findings suggest that compensatory factors
have lessened the impact of D. polymorpha on the pelagic lower food web of Oneida Lake. Light appears to be a
crucial factor, allowing phytoplankton production deeper in
the water column. It appears that low food resources did not
impact the daphnid community and that this community is
more sensitive to top-down pressure from planktivores
(Mills and Forney 1983). Consistent with these findings, we
found no evidence that zebra mussels had a negative impact
on young yellow perch production. While our analysis has
focused on the short-term impacts of zebra mussels on the
pelagic food web of Oneida Lake, the long-term effects of
zebra mussels is yet to be determined. In a long-term European
study (40+ years; Karatayev et al. 1997), the zebra
mussel invasion caused an increase in water clarity and
macrophyte and zoobenthos biomass and a decrease in
phytoplankton and zooplankton biomass. However, after
approximately 10 years, zebra mussel impacts were less pronounced
but the lake ecosystem did not revert to pre-zebra
mussel conditions. Whether Oneida Lake follows a pattern
similar to that of Lake Lukomske will only be ascertained
through continued and rigorous study of the pelagic food
web in the coming decades.