xabstract

The Asian clam Corbicula fluminea is one of the most invasive species in brackish and freshwater ecosystems. In the Minho estuary (NW of the Iberian Peninsula) this invasive species can reach densities up to 4000 ind m− 2, occurring over large areas. C. fluminea can significantly alter the physical structure of the benthic envi- ronment, and the structure and functioning of this estuarine community. In this context, this work aimed to evaluate the correlation of different densities of C. fluminea on the macrozoobenthos across five sites in the Minho estuary during three distinct periods of 2009 (winter, spring and summer). The comparative analysis indicate that macrozoobenthic density, biomass and diversity positively respond to increasing density of C. fluminea, with abiotic conditions also playing an important role in the observed patterns, both in brackish and freshwater settings. Crustacea, Insecta and Gastropoda are the main faunal groups responding positively to C. fluminea increasing density. The mechanisms responsible for these positive trends still needs to be established although engineering activities and the increase in waste products may play essential roles. Nevertheless, despite such positive effects, earlier studies have showed that the density, biomass and spatial distribution of some species, especially native bivalves dramatically decreased after C. fluminea introduction. 

xintroduction

Non-indigenous invasive species (NIS) are altering terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems at unprecedented rates representing a serious threat to native biodiversity (Carlton and Geller, 1993; Cox, 2004; Davis, 2009; Lodge et al., 1998). 
Freshwater bivalve invasions can dramatically change the ecolog- ical characteristics of the invaded ecosystems (Sousa et al., 2009). Bi- valves can create, modify and maintain habitats through physical modifications of the environment (i.e. physical ecosystem engineer- ing; Jones et al., 1994, 1997) with particularly important impacts in shallow-water areas (Gutiérrez et al., 2003; Sousa et al., 2009). Bi- valves have a series of engineering attributes (e.g. shell production, sediments reworking, filter feeding) which, depending on species density and activity rates, may cause significant modifications of the benthic environment (Erwin, 2008; Gutiérrez et al., 2003; Ruesink et al., 2005; Sousa et al., 2009). These organisms can be also responsi- ble for the increase in nutrients, released at the form of feces and pseudofaeces, which may be also responsible for significant alter- ations of the benthic environment (Dame, 1996). 
Currently the Asian clam Corbicula fluminea is one of the most widespread species in aquatic ecosystems being listed as one of the 100 worst invasive species in Europe (DAISIE). Native from Southeast Asia, C. fluminea has been dispersing worldwide over the last 80 years, being well recognized by its invasive behavior and high economic and ecological impacts (Darrigran, 2002; McMahon, 2002). Its broad geographic dispersal in the last decades is partially explained by its rapid growth, early sexual maturity, short lifespan, high fecundity and association with human activities (Sousa et al., 2008b). C. fluminea was reported for the first time in Europe in the late 1970s (Mouthon, 1981), being nowadays widespread in this continent (e.g. Iberian Peninsula, central Europe and part of the South-eastern Europe; Araujo et al., 1993; Ciutti and Cappelletti, 2009; Kinzelbach, 1991; Sousa et al., 2008b; Swinnen et al., 1998). In North, Central and South America, this species has also a wide geo- graphic dispersal and has been reported in several countries ranging from Argentina to southern Canada (Darrigran, 2002; Strayer, 1999).
Corbicula species can modify the environment influencing biolog- ical communities and ecosystem functioning (Sousa et al., 2009). On a smaller scale, the dominance of C. fluminea can be related to the re- duction of other bivalve species (Sousa et al., 2008c,d); however it is possible that the C. fluminea increases overall density and diversity of benthic species, once it can provide changes related to, the avail- ability of a structural complex substratum suitable to colonization
by infaunal and epifaunal species, and also to the abiotic conditions resulting from sediment reworking, filtration and high levels of feces and pseudofeces produced (Hakenkamp and Palmer, 1999; Vaughn and Hakenkamp, 2001).
In this study, the null hypotheses of similar density, species richness and biomass of the macrozoobenthic assemblages under different den- sities of C. fluminea were tested. First the correlation of different densi- ties of C. fluminea on the macrozoobenthic assemblages, when subject to brackish and freshwater conditions was evaluated. Then, we investi- gated the temporal changes in the assemblages' characteristics, and also the faunal groups mostly influenced by C. fluminea increasing density.

xmethods

2.1. Study area
This study was conducted in the River Minho estuary (NW of the Iberian Peninsula). C. fluminea was first recorded in this ecosystem in 1989 and nowadays dominates the density, biomass (e.g. some sites with density and biomass higher than 4000 ind m− 2 and 550 g AFDW m− 2, respectively) and secondary production of the benthic compartment (Sousa et al., 2007; Sousa et al., 2008a,d,e). The River Minho originates in the Serra de Meira, Spain, with 95% of its hydrolog- ical basin located in this country and 5% in Portugal. It extends across 300 km, flowing NNE–SSW into the Atlantic Ocean. The influence of spring tides extends approximately 40 km upstream, covering a total area of 23 km2. This estuary can reach a maximum width of 2 km and
its waters are partially mixed most of the time. However, salt wedge conditions can develop when major floods occur. This estuarine area has been described in more detail in previous studies (see Sousa et al., 2005, 2008a,c) and the characterization of the macrozoobenthic assem- blages along the estuarine gradient can be found in Sousa et al. (2008e).
2.2. Sampling strategy and laboratory analysis
Samples were collected during three distinct periods in 2009 (winter, spring and summer) in five sites along the Minho estuary (Fig. 1). The temporal scale of sampling covered the pre- and post- recruitment periods of most benthic invertebrates and encompassed seasonal climatic variation. All the sites were located in subtidal soft bottoms and were selected based on the following criteria: (i) three sites were chosen in the lower estuarine area to evaluate the influ- ence of C. fluminea on the brackish macrozoobenthic assemblage (S1, S2 and S3); (ii) two sites were chosen in the upper estuarine area to evaluate the possible effect of C. fluminea on the freshwater macro- zoobenthic assemblage (S4 and S5); Sites within each salinity regime (i.e. brackish or freshwater) were chosen based on their similar abiotic conditions (e.g. depth, salinity and sediment characteristics) and their variation in C. fluminea density. In the case of the brackish sites, C. fluminea density was the highest in S3, intermediary in S2 and the lowest in S1. In sites located in the upper estuary the higher density was higher in S5 than in S4. Due to the extensive spread of this NIS in the estuary, it was impossible to find out control sites without live C. fluminea in both estuarine areas. The three sites located downstream
were subject to higher salinity (mainly in summer), once they suffered a major influence of the marine adjacent area, while the sites located up- stream, despite suffering the tidal influence were always subject to freshwater conditions. In addition, the brackish and freshwater areas also differed in sediment characteristics, with finer sediments in the upper estuarine areas and coarser (clean sands) in the lower parts.
Abiotic variables were measured at each site during high tide. Temperature, conductivity, total dissolved solids, redox potential, sa- linity, dissolved oxygen and pH were measured 20 cm above the bot- tom, using a multiparametrical sea gage YSI 6820. Water samples were collected to colorimetrically determine nitrites, nitrates, ammo- nia, phosphates and hardness. Sediment samples were collected and analyzed for granulometry and organic matter content. The granulo- metry samples were oven-dried for 72 h at 60 °C, then sieved with Ro-Tap agitation, using columns of sieves of different mesh sizes (>2 mm — gravel; 1–2 mm — very coarse sand; 0.5–1 mm — coarse sand; 0.25–0.5 mm — medium sand; 0.125–0.25 mm — fine sand; 0.063–0.125 — very fine sand; b 0.063 — silt + clay). The frequency of each size class was expressed as the percentage of total weight. The organic matter present in the sediment was determined by com- bustion during 24 h at 550 °C in a muffle furnace. The organic matter content of the sediments was estimated as the weight loss on ignition and expressed as a percentage of the dry weight of the whole sample.
The macrozoobenthic assemblages associated with C. fluminea were estimated using a Van Veen grab with an area of 500 cm2 and a maxi- mum capacity of 5000 cm3. Four replicates were taken from each site. The samples were sieved through a 500 μm mesh and the macrozoo- benthos sorted, fixed in 70% ethanol, and later identified to species level, whenever possible. Faunal biomass was calculated using the ash free dry weight method (AFDW) following Kramer et al. (1994).
2.3. Data analysis
All analyses were performed considering the samples from the brackish area (S1, S2, and S3) independently from those of the freshwa- ter area (S4 and S5), since there are significant differences between the benthic assemblages that colonize these areas (Sousa et al., 2008e).
Environmental data were analyzed with the PRIMER 6 package (Clarke and Warwick, 2001). All data were normalized, without prior
data transformation, in order to avoid bias due to differences in variabil- ity range of each variable (Clarke and Warwick, 2001). Non-metric mul- tidimensional scaling ordination (nMDS), based on differences in species density, followed by a one way analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) were used to discriminate differences between macrozoobenthic assemblages and time of the year associated to C. fluminea. Similarity in- dices were calculated with log(x + 1)-transformed data using the Bray- Curtis coefficient.
Since most of the biologic data departed from normality (Shapiro– Wilk's W test), comparisons in C. fluminea density and the macrozoo- benthos density, species richness, biomass, Shannon/Wiener index and evenness between sites and time of the year (winter, spring and summer) were made using the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-test (pairwise) or Kruskal–Wallis (multiple comparisons). Once the environmental characteristics were normal distributed the com- parisons between time of the year (winter, spring and summer) were evaluated through ANOVA. All these analyses were made using Statistica version 5.1 (Statsoft Corp., United States of America).
The relation between C. fluminea density (ind m− 2) and the density, biomass, species richness, Shannon/Wiener index and evenness of the macrozoobenthic assemblages was evaluated through correlations methods using Statistica version 5.1 (Statsoft Corp., United States of America).

xresults

3.1. Abiotic characterization
Environmental characteristics differed among the lower and upper estuarine areas, throughout the seasons (Table 1). The detailed abiotic characterization for each site is in Table 2.
3.2. Biotic characterization
During sampling, S3 (winter=2915ind m−2; spring=2720ind m− 2; summer = 3170 ind m− 2) presented the highest C. fluminea density and S4 (winter = 55 ind m− 2; spring = 95 ind m− 2; sum- mer = 380 ind m− 2) the lowest (sites were always significantly differ- ent: winter χ2 = 16.97, p b 0.01; spring χ2 = 16.0, p b 0.01; summer
χ2 = 16.0, p b 0.01), whereas the highest C. fluminea biomass was ob- served in S5 (winter = 460 g AFDW m− 2; spring = 894 g AFDW m− 2; summer = 1209 g AFDW m− 2) and the lowest in S1 (winter = 24 g AFDW m− 2; spring=22 g AFDW m− 2; summer=114 g AFDW m− 2) (sites were always significantly different: winter χ2 = 16.0, p b 0.01; spring χ2 = 16.0, p b 0.01; summer χ2 = 16.0, p b 0.01) (Fig. 2).
A total of 56 macrozoobenthic taxa were collected: 32 taxa in the brackish sites (4406 specimens), and 50 taxa in the freshwater sites (2651 specimens). In the brackish area the five most abundant taxa were Corophium multisetosum (63.2%), Cyathura carinata (12.4%), Chironomidae (6.8%), Gammarus chevreuxi (3.9%) and Gammarus sp. 1 (2.7%), while the remaining 27 taxa contributed to 11.1%. At the freshwater sites, the five most abundant taxa were Enchytraeidae sp1 (34.1%), Lumbriculidae sp1 (19.5%), Chironomidae (19.2%), Tubi- ficidae (11.2%), Hydropsychidae (2.4%), while the other 45 taxa con- tributed to the remaining 13.5%.
The nMDS ordination distinguished three groups: one represented by the freshwater area, one by the brackish area during winter and spring seasons, and the other by the brackish area during summer (Fig. 3). The ANOSIM analysis confirmed this clear distinction be- tween brackish and freshwater areas (Global R = 0.775; p b 0.01). Ad- ditionally, when analyzed only for the brackish area (Global R = 0.836; p b 0.01), the pairwise comparisons indicated that summer was the most distinct season (winter, summer R = 0.994; p b 0.01; spring, summer R = 0.975; p b 0.01), despite the others seasons being also different (winter, spring R = 0.384; p b 0.01). For the fresh- water area (Global R = 0.243; p b 0.01) only the winter was different
from the other seasons (winter, spring R = 0.456; p b 0.01; winter, summer R = 0.170; p b 0.05; spring, summer R = 0.129; p > 0.05).
Comparisons of the macrozoobenthic assemblages among the different sites indicated that the species richness was significantly higher in S3 (winter = 11.0 ± 1.41 taxa m− 2; spring = 11.25 ± 2.06 taxa m− 2; summer = 11.0 ± 1.41 taxa m− 2) and S5 (winter = 16.75 ± 2.75 taxa m− 2; spring = 15.5 ± 2.08 taxa m− 2; summer = 19.75 ± 1.5 taxa m− 2) (Table 3). Peak macrozoobenthic density (S1=2950.0±333.27 ind m− 2; S2=6005.0±578.36 ind m− 2; S3= 7525.0 ± 1436.61 ind m− 2) and biomass (S1 = 0.9 ± 0.18 g AFDW m− 2; S2=1.5±0.25 g AFDW m− 2; S3=3.0±1.13 g AFDW m− 2) at the brackish sites were observed during the summer, period that corresponds to amphipod recruitment (Table 3). Peak density (S4 = 2345.0 ± 883.69 ind m− 2; S5 = 3465.0 ± 1377.38 ind m− 2) at the freshwater sites was observed during the winter in association to higher Oligochaeta density (Table 3).
In most cases, positive correlations were found between the den- sity of C. fluminea and macrozoobenthic community descriptors (fau- nal density, species richness, faunal biomass and species diversity) at the brackish and freshwater areas (Fig. 4). Exceptions were summer Shannon/Wiener index at the brackish areas, winter evenness at freshwater areas, and summer evenness both at the brackish and freshwater areas.
Significant between-site differences regarding the density of crus- taceans and insects were observed at the brackish area irrespective of the time of the year, and the same was true for gastropods in the freshwater area (Table 4).

xdiscussion

Significant biotic and abiotic differences were observed between the brackish and freshwater sites of the Minho estuary, with the brackish sites being characterized by a higher salinity and coarser sediments with low organic matter content, and the freshwater sites by finer sediments richer in organic matter content. These re- sults corroborate previous studies performed in the area (Sousa et al., 2008e). Within each area, the abiotic conditions varied through- out the seasons, which undoubtedly influenced the assemblages. The macrozoobenthic assemblage of the brackish sites presented an increasing pattern over the sampled periods, with the peak, in terms of density, species richness and biomass, being reached during the summer. The nMDS plot was able to distinguish the summer from the others seasons, suggesting a new group, different from the winter and spring that was also considered dissimilar by the ANOSIM results. This summer distinction is related to the recruitment of the majority of the species that colonize the brackish macrozoobenthic assem- blage. This recruitment was also reflected in the lower values of the Shannon/Wiener index and evenness during this season, which is re- lated to the observed dominance of amphipod species. Meanwhile, the macrozoobenthic assemblage of the freshwater area presented, in general, a decreasing pattern in terms of density during the study period, with a peak observed in winter. The nMDS plot was not able to distinguish the freshwater assemblage in more than one group,
despite the winter season being different than the others, as showed by the ANOSIM results. This difference observed for the winter is due to the presence of oligochaetes that were most abundant during this season. Detritivorous oligochaetes were probably benefited due to in- creased winter availability of detritus as a result of increased river flow and an underlying increase in detritus from terrestrial origin (Harper et al., 1981). This situation was confirmed by the higher levels of organic matter observed in S4 and S5 during the winter rel- ative to the two other seasons.
Overall, a clear positive relationship between C. fluminea density and macrozoobenthos density, biomass and diversity was established. However, our methodological approach precludes us to elucidate the main mechanisms responsible for these positive trends. Among all C. fluminea characteristics, the shell reefs created possibly provide the most obvious physical change in the invaded area. These reefs form comprise a rigid three dimensional structure in an otherwise relatively smooth, soft, featureless bottom (Sousa et al., 2009). Al- though the shells of bivalves are different from previously existing native substrates (e.g. rocks, wood debris, other bivalve shells), they possibly exert a great influence as structural elements by providing conditions not present elsewhere in the landscape (Sousa et al., 2009; Wright et al., 2002). Shell production may affect other organ- isms by the provision of substrata for attachment, the provision of ref- uges to avoid predators, competitors, physical and/or physiological stress, and by affecting the transport of particles and solutes in the
benthic environment (Gutiérrez et al., 2003). However, the creation of novel three-dimensional structure is not the only physical change caused by this NIS. C. fluminea also has high filtration rates and a great capacity for sediment reworking, which can lead to a variety of abiotic changes (e.g. water clarity, oxygen, redox potential, amount of organic matter, particle size) that can reverberate in alterations in the macrozoobenthic composition. C. fluminea shows high filtration rates, removing a wide range of suspended particles (Sousa et al., 2009) and, thus, increasing water clarity and light penetration (Phelps, 1994). Though, in this case (nearby sites) this activity has less influence due to the water movement. High filtration rates turns out to have more influence when considering the whole river scale, enabling under these conditions to important changes of the overall water clarity. Another consequence of C. fluminea filter
feeding is the deposition of ingested particles as feces or pseudofeces, which adds organic matter to the bottom (Vaughn and Hakenkamp, 2001). Additionally, by changing water and sediment fluxes at the water-sediment interface, sediment reworking can lead to signifi- cantly modifications in sediment chemistry, grain size and organic matter content (Hakenkamp and Palmer, 1999; Hakenkamp et al., 2001). These changes mediated by deposition and sediment rework- ing can also cause important biotic changes (Norling and Kautsky, 2007).
Some macrozoobenthic groups responded differently to increased C. fluminea density at both estuarine locations. Crustacea, Insecta and Gastropoda increased their density and biomass with increased C. fluminea density. Such positive responses to C. fluminea density could be related to increased habitat structure and the production
of feces and pseudofeces (Crooks, 1998; MacIsaac, 1996). In the case of Crustacea, particularly amphipods, C. fluminea shells might be serving as refuge from water flow and predators (Borthagaray and Carranza, 2007; Dahl and Greeberg, 1996). In addition, it is possible that the crustaceans benefit from organic matter availability due to C. fluminea biodeposits. Similar arguments may also apply to insects, particularly to Chironomidae larvae. Gastropods probably use C. fluminea shells as hard substrate for attachment and grazing, using interstitial habitats as refugia as well (Ricciardi et al., 1997). Moreover, in some cases, shells are also used for oviposition (Stewart et al., 1998). Some studies also indicate a positive relationship between organic matter and the density and fecundity of certain gastropods, suggesting that the feces and pseudofeces produced by C. fluminea might also have a positive influence on gastropods (Brown, 1991; Osenberg, 1989). Native bivalves were probably dis- placed by C. fluminea presumably via settlement inhibition or unsui- table abiotic conditions for juvenile development (Sousa et al., 2008c,d). On the other hand, oligochaetes are small infaunal forms that are unlikely to be influenced by the presence of C. fluminea in the sediment matrix. Rather, they may be much more influenced by organic matter content available in the sediments, which may depend on watershed scale inputs from terrestrial areas rather than local C. fluminea activity.
Our results suggested that bivalve invasive ecosystem engineers may positively influence the habitat heterogeneity, modifying the diversity of the macrozoobenthic assemblages (Borthagaray and Carranza, 2007; Ricciardi et al., 1997; Stewart et al., 1998; Werner and Rothhaupt, 2007; Zaiko et al., 2009). The overall patterns were similar in the two assemblages (brackish and freshwater), i.e. a posi- tive relationship between C. fluminea density and the density, bio- mass and diversity of the macrozoobenthos was found. Some faunal groups (Crustacea, Insecta and Gastropoda) of invertebrates clearly take advantage from the rising density of C. fluminea, being probably the major drivers of the changes a mixture of autogenic (presence of shells) above and below ground ecosystem engineering in combina- tion with the production of feces and pseudofeces and allogenic sed- iment reworking activity, allied to changes in the abiotic conditions of each area throughout the year.