xabstract
1. Invasive species are a key driver of global environmental change, with frequently strong
negative consequences for native biodiversity and ecosystem processes. Understanding competitive
interactions between invaders and functionally similar native species provides an
important benchmark for predicting the consequences of invasion. However, even though
having a broad dietary niche is widely considered a key factor determining invasion success,
little is known about the effects of competition with functionally similar native competitors
on the dietary niche breadths of invasive species.
2. We used a combination of field experiments and field surveys to examine the impacts of
competition with a functionally similar native crab species on the population densities, growth
rates and diet of the globally widespread invasive red swamp crayfish in an African river
ecosystem.
3. The presence of native crabs triggered significant dietary niche constriction within the invasive
crayfish population. Further, growth rates of both species were reduced significantly, and
by a similar extent, in the presence of one another. In spite of this, crayfish maintained positive
growth rates in the presence of crabs, whereas crabs lost mass in the presence of crayfish.
Consequently, over the 3-year duration of the study, crab abundance declined at those sites
invaded by the crayfish, becoming locally extinct at one.
4. The invasive crayfish had a dramatic effect on ecosystem structure and functioning, halving
benthic invertebrate densities and increasing decomposition rates fourfold compared to
the crabs. This indicates that replacement of native crabs by invasive crayfish likely alters the
structure and functioning of African river ecosystems significantly.
5. This study provides a novel example of the constriction of the dietary niche of a successful
invasive population in the presence of competition from a functionally similar native species.
This finding highlights the importance of considering both environmental and ecolo
xintroduction
The increasingly rapid spread of biological invaders in recent
decades (e.g. Ricciardi 2006; Jackson & Grey 2013) is a key
driver of global environmental change with major implications
for biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (Chapin
et al. 2000; Gurevitch & Padilla 2004; Pejchar & Mooney
2009). Invasive species can have dramatic and often irreversible
effects on ecosystem services, frequently with considerable
economic Walsh, Carpenter & Vander Zanden 2016), particularly in
aquatic ecosystems, which tend to be especially susceptible
(Rahel & Olden 2008). They can change fundamental ecological
processes from the level of the individual to the whole
ecosystem (Peltzer et al. 2010; Penk, Irvine & Donohue
2015; Penk et al. 2016) and frequently alter the distribution
of native species via a range of competitive interactions, predation
pressure and/or habitat degradation (Mack et al.
2000; Simon & Townsend 2003; Hooper et al. 2005). Classic
invasion theory (Elton 1958) predicts that a successful invader
can establish itself in an unoccupied niche or displace
similar native species by overlapping their niche and eventually
out-competing them for limited resources. Having a generalist
diet is a common trait of successful invaders, allowing
them to opportunistically exploit diverse resources in novel
environments and competitively exclude native species (Snyder
& Evans 2006). Hence, the decline of native species following
an invasion is often a consequence of direct
interspecific competition for resources (e.g. Porter & Savignano
1990; Olsson et al. 2009).
Classic niche theory predicts that species occupy a larger
niche in the absence of interspecific competition
(Hutchinson 1957; Van Valen 1965). Hence, competing
invasive and native species would be expected to occupy
smaller niches than their allopatric counterparts (Bolnick
et al. 2010). However, increased competition for resources
might necessitate an increase in dietary niche breadth in
order to maintain energy requirements (SvanbÄack & Bolnick
2007). Empirical evidence indicates that interspecific
competition can cause the niche widths of consumers to
increase or decrease depending on the context but the reason
for this variation is still unclear (Araujo, Bolnick &
Layman 2011). Despite these apparently contradictory
processes (Araujo, Bolnick & Layman 2011), the dietary
niche breadth of invasive and native competitors has
rarely been examined, even though it is likely a key factor
in determining invasion success and predicting impacts of
invaders on biodiversity (e.g. Jackson & Britton 2013;
Penk, Irvine & Donohue 2015).
Some of the most destructive freshwater invaders are
crayfish (Lodge et al. 2012), which can alter ecosystem
structure and processes by, for example, homogenizing biotic
assemblages and altering rates of both primary production
and decomposition (Stenroth & NystrÄom 2003; Renai
& Gherardi 2004; Gherardi & Acquistapace 2007; Jackson
et al. 2014). Ecologists have yet to examine fully the range
of mechanisms underpinning the impacts of invasive crayfish
on ecosystem structure and functioning (Lodge et al.
2012). The red swamp crayfish (Procambarus clarkii) is a
particularly important invader due to its global distribution
(Capinha, Leung & Anastacio 2011) and the severe
impacts it has on ecosystems (Klose & Cooper 2012;
Jackson et al. 2014). In the 1960s, the species was introduced
to multiple locations throughout East Africa for
aquaculture (Harper et al. 2002), where its effects remain
largely unknown. This widespread introduction of crayfish
in the region has led to encroachment on the range of
many native freshwater crab species, several of which are
endangered and endemic (Cumberlidge et al. 2009).
Indeed, crayfish have replaced crabs as the primary food
source of African clawless otters in some Kenyan rivers
(Ogada 2006), providing indirect evidence that they are
becoming more abundant and out-competing crabs. Crabs
and crayfish are both benthic omnivores with similar feeding
mechanisms. They frequently occupy similar functional
roles as shredders driving detrital processing (NystrÄom,
Bronmark & Graneli 1996; Dudgeon 1999; Dobson et al.
2002; Lancaster et al. 2008) and, consequently, the introduced
crayfish might be expected to be functionally redundant
(sensu Naeem 1998). However, even morphologically
similar species can vary significantly in their effects on
ecosystems (OíConnor & Bruno 2007; Matthews et al.
2011; Jackson et al. 2014; Penk, Irvine & Donohue 2015).
Furthermore, highly invasive species tend to be more voracious
than their native counterparts (Haddaway et al.
2012; Alexander et al. 2014), implying that red swamp
crayfish could cause considerable alteration to ecosystem
structure and processes were they to replace native crabs.
Using a combination of field experiments and surveys,
we examined interactions between the globally widespread
invasive red swamp crayfish and a native crab, Potamonautes
loveni, and compared their impacts on the structure
and functioning of a Kenyan river ecosystem. We quantified
dietary niche breadth in experimental and natural
populations of both species in allopatry and sympatry by
analysis of carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes from muscle
tissue, which provides information on dietary preferences
integrated over time. We then obtained quantitative
measures of total foraging niche space at the population
level using methods that incorporate individual variation
of stable isotope ratios (Layman et al. 2007a; Newsome
et al. 2007; Jackson et al. 2011). We hypothesized that (i)
the invasive crayfish has stronger per capita effects on
ecosystem structure and functioning than the native crab
and (ii) the invasive crayfish and native crabs will have a
larger niche breadth when present together.
xmethods
The River Malewa is the primary tributary of Lake Naivasha
(catchment area 1750 km2) in Kenyaís Rift Valley in East Africa.
Red swamp crayfish were introduced to Lake Naivasha in 1970
and subsequently spread throughout the catchment as a result of
further introductions and natural dispersal, leading to their intrusion
upon the range of a native river crab, P. loveni (Foster &
Harper 2007). The native range of P. loveni extends from Eastern
Kenya into Western Uganda (Cumberlidge 2008).river temperatures (15ñ20 ∞C; Fantle et al. 1999; Fry et al. 2003;
McIntyre & Flecker 2006). We also collected epilithic algae,
macrophytes, detritus and dominant benthic invertebrate species
from the experimental location for stable isotope analysis. All tissue
samples were oven-dried at 60 ∞C, ground using an agate pestle
and mortar and 06ñ10 mg weighed into 6 9 4 mm tin cups
using a microbalance. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analyses
were carried out using an elemental analyser (Flash EA 1112
series; Thermo-Finnigan, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a continuous
flow isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Finnigan MAT
DeltaPlus; Thermo-Finnigan). Secondary standards (sucrose for
carbon; ammonium sulphate for nitrogen) with known relation to
international standards (Pee Dee Belemnite for carbon; nitrogen
in air for nitrogen) were used as reference materials. Cyclohaxonone-
2,4-Dinitrophemylhydrazone was used as an internal standard
and resulted in typical precision of < 01& for carbon and
< 03% for nitrogen.
Finally, upon completion of the first field experiment, the guts
were dissected from 5 randomly selected individual crayfish from
each treatment and stored in 50% ethanol. A Novex Holland
Microscope (Euromex Microscopen BV, Arnhem, the Netherlands)
at 910 magnification was then used to separate vegetation
and invertebrate contents before drying to constant weight to calculate
the relative proportion of plant to animal material ingested
by each individual.
field surveys
We examined the distribution of both crabs and crayfish at four
sites in the River Malewa, located approximately 10, 30, 35 and
40 km upstream of Lake Naivasha, in 2008, 2009 and 2010. We
quantified the abundance of adult crayfish and crabs on 3ñ8
occasions at each site in each year over a 6-week period, using a
series of crayfish traps of 5 mm mesh, baited with fish pellets and
left for between 1 and 2 h. All crayfish and/or crabs were
removed and counted, and we used the catch per unit effort
(CPUE; number of individuals per trap per hour) to quantify relative
abundance among sites. Samples (n = 6ñ18) of a selected
common size range of crabs (26ñ35 mm carapace width) and
crayfish (31ñ45 mm carapace length) from all sites on all sampling
occasions were prepared for stable isotope analysis as
described previously. Epilithic algae, macrophytes, detritus and
dominant benthic invertebrate species were also collected from all
the sites for subsequent stable isotope analysis.
data analyses
We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test for independent and
combined effects of crayfish and crabs on algal biomass, rates of
leaf litter breakdown, trophic niche widths (see below), total
invertebrate abundance and invertebrate taxon richness. We measured
leaf litter breakdown in both field experiments (Table 1)
and tested for differences between experiments by incorporating
experiment number as an additional random factor. There was
no difference between the two experiments, and this random
effect was then removed to maximize the power of the subsequent
analysis. The Tukeyís procedure was used to make post hoc comparisons
among levels of significant terms. We used permutational
multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA; Anderson,
Gorley & Clarke 2008) to test for effects of our experimental
manipulations on the structure of invertebrate assemblages using
the PERMANOVA+ add-in to PRIMER
 version 6.1 (PRIMER-E Ltd,
Plymouth, UK). These analyses were performed with 9999 permutations
of the residuals under a reduced model (McArdle &
Anderson 2001; Anderson, Gorley & Clarke 2008) and were
based on BrayñCurtis similarity matrices calculated from log
(X + 1)-transformed abundance data. Similarity percentages
(SIMPER; Clark & Warwick 2001) analysis was used to determine
the contribution of each benthic invertebrate taxon to the
pairwise BrayñCurtis dissimilarities between experimental treatments.
All analyses were balanced and variables were transformed
where necessary prior to analysis to homogenize
variances.
The stable isotope-derived population metrics of carbon range
(CRb) and nitrogen range (NRb) were used as measures of the
trophic niche width of crabs and crayfish (Layman et al. 2007b;
Jackson et al. 2012) in both the field experiments and field surveys.
CRb and NRb were calculated as the Euclidean distance
between the individuals with the lowest and highest d13C and
d15N, respectively, and therefore reflect the total range of isotopic
space used by a group of organisms. To enable comparison
among variables and to account for small sample sizes, the metrics
were bootstrapped (n = 10 000; indicated with a subscript ëbí)
based on the minimum sample sizes (2 individuals in the field
experiment [in the enclosures containing 2 crabs and 2 crayfish ñ
each measurement was therefore replicated independently five
times (Table 1)] and 6 individuals in the field surveys [at field
sites with declining crab numbers]). We then used ANOVA to test
for differences in the trophic niche width of crayfish and crabs
when together and apart in the field experiment. However, given
that one of our experimental treatments contained no crayfish or
crabs, and could not therefore provide measurements of trophic
niche widths of either species, our statistical model testing for differences
in trophic niche width comprised two fixed factors: species
(two levels: crabs and crayfish) and the presence of
interspecific competition with a functionally similar species (two
levels: competition and no competition). For the field survey
data, we tested for correlations between our metrics of trophic
niche width of each species and the corresponding CPUE of its
functionally similar competitor. To ensure comparability in the
isotopic data among survey sites and years, we used PERMANOVA
to test for any effect of site or year on the stable isotopic signature
of putative resources (biofilm, macrophytes, detritus and
dominant invertebrate taxa). We found similar stable isotope values
of putative resources both among survey sites and years
(Table S1), indicating that any differences in trophic niche width
between crayfish and crabs were attributable to actual dietary
variation.
xresults
There was a significant interaction between the presence
of crayfish and crab on rates of leaf litter breakdown
(ANOVA; F1,36 = 1266, P = 0001). Rates of breakdown
were significantly higher in the cages containing only crayfish
compared with those containing none of the manipulated
consumers (control treatment). In contrast, cages
containing crabs were similar to those in the control treatment,
while cages containing both crayfish and crabs had intermediate effect on breakdown rates (Fig. 1). The latter
result indicates that the presence of crabs did not alter the
per capita effects of crayfish on leaf litter breakdown
rates. Neither crabs nor crayfish affected the standing
stock of epilithic algae.
Crayfish reduced the density of benthic invertebrates
(ANOVA, F1,16 = 939, P = 0007, Fig. 2) and altered their
multivariate structure significantly (PERMANOVA; pseudo-
F1,17 = 605, P = 0004). The latter result was driven primarily
by reductions in the density of hydropsychid caddis
flies (Trichoptera) together with an increase in the
density of oligochaete worms (Table 2). In contrast, crabs
had no effect on the density or multivariate structure of
benthic invertebrate assemblages. However, both crabs
and crayfish reduced the taxon richness of benthic invertebrates
significantly, irrespective of the presence or absence
of the other decapod consumer species (ANOVA; crayfish:
F1,16 = 676, P = 0019; crabs: F1,16 = 484, P = 0043;
Fig. 2).
The nitrogen range (NRb) of both crabs and crayfish
was reduced significantly in the presence of the other
functionally similar species (ANOVA; F1,17 = 464,
P = 0046; Fig. 3a). There was, however, no effect of the
presence of crab or crayfish on the carbon range (CRb;
Fig. 3b) of the other species. Gut content analysis
revealed that the relative contribution of animal and plant
material to the diet of crayfish did not change in the presence
of crabs (455  177% and 468  98% animal
material in sympatric and allopatric populations, respectively).
Per capita growth rates of both crabs and crayfish were
reduced significantly by the presence of the other species
compared with a similar biomass of conspecifics (ANOVA;
F1,48 = 664, P = 0013; Fig. 4). Both crabs and crayfish
experienced similar reductions in both absolute (ANOVA;
species*competition interaction: F1,48 = 0003, P = 096)
and relative (F1,48 = 002, P = 09) growth rates due to
the presence of the other species. However, growth rates
of crayfish were significantly higher than those of crabs
(F1,48 = 1063, P = 0002). Thus, even though their growth
rates were reduced significantly in the presence of crabs,
crayfish still gained significant biomass over the course of
the experiment. In contrast, crabs generally lost biomass
when present together with crayfish (Fig. 4).
field surveys
Crabs and crayfish were found coexisting at the two middle
sampling sites (Sites 2 and 3) of the survey for at least
two of the three study years (Fig. 5). Both sites showed a
similar trend from 2008 to 2010 of crayfish CPUE
increasing simultaneously with a decline in crab CPUE.
In fact, crabs appeared to be locally extinct at Site 2 by
2010, while the crayfish population was seven times larger
compared with the previous year. In contrast, only crayfish were present at the most downstream of our survey
sites, whereas only crabs were found at the most
upstream location throughout the study period (Fig. 5).
We found significant inverse correlations between the
abundance of crabs and both the nitrogen (NRb;
r11 = 067, P = 0018; Fig. 6a) and carbon (CRb;
r11 = 080, P = 0002; Fig. 6b) range of crayfish over the
four sites. However, neither measure of crab trophic niche
width correlated significantly with the abundance of
crayfish (CRb: r11 = 054, P = 0071; NRb: r11 = 053,
P = 0074).
xdiscussion
In 1958, Elton proposed that invasive species can outcompete
similar native competitors by occupying a
broader niche. This classic mechanism of invasion was
exemplified recently by Olsson et al. (2009) and Ercoli
et al. (2014), showing that trophic niche breadth of an
invasive crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) was double or
treble that of a native crayfish (Astacus astacus). Indeed,
it is typically reported that invasive species occupy a
broad niche and suppress the niche of similar natives (e.g.
Human & Gordon 1996; Thomson 2004). Conversely, we
found that competition between invasive crayfish and
native crabs resulted in reduction in the diet breadth of both species. In our field experiments, the presence of
interspecific competition between crayfish and crabs
caused a decline in the nitrogen range of both species and
our field surveys revealed that both the carbon and nitrogen
ranges of the invasive crayfish correlated inversely
with the abundance of crabs. While it has been shown
that invaders can alter their feeding behaviour in the presence
of native species (e.g. Harrington et al. 2009), our
study provides a novel example of the constriction of the
dietary niche of a successful invasive population in the
presence of competition from a functionally similar native
species.
Invasive species regularly out-compete and reduce the
growth rate of native species (e.g. Smith 2005; Riley 2009;
Britton et al. 2011). However, we found strong and
apparently symmetric interspecific competition, measured
in terms of biomass change, between the invasive crayfish
and native crabs. Growth rates of crayfish individuals
were reduced in the presence of crabs compared to in the
presence of a similar biomass of conspecifics, implying
that interspecific competition was significantly greater
than intraspecific competition. This is consistent with the
presence of significant interspecific aggression, which we
observed repeatedly during the study, causing reductions
in foraging efficiency of both species when present
together. Such aggressive behaviour between species is frequently
greater than aggression with conspecifics (Polo-
Cavia, Lopez & Martin 2011). Even though both absolute
and relative reductions in growth rates were similar for
both decapod consumers, crayfish still exhibited positive per capita growth rates in the presence of crabs, whereas
crabs generally lost mass in the presence of the invasive
crayfish. This likely contributed to the decline in crab
abundance at sites invaded by crayfish. Invasive crayfish
have out-competed native crayfish across North America
and Europe by triggering similar declines in growth rates
of natives (Hill & Lodge 1999; Nakata & Goshima 2006;
Dunn et al. 2009). As far as we are aware, this is the first
study to test experimentally for interspecific competition
between native crabs and introduced crayfish, despite
numerous overlapping populations in both Europe and
Africa (e.g. Barbaresi & Gherardi 1997; Foster & Harper
2007; du Preez & Smit 2013).
As omnivores, crayfish and crabs can survive when a
resource is limited by shifting their diet to alternative
resources to compensate (Tillberg et al. 2007; Grey & Jackson
2012). This is advantageous when exploiting niches
with novel resources, which may explain the successful
widespread distribution of some invasive crayfish and crab
species (Capinha, Leung & Anastacio 2011). Flexibility in
diet choice does not necessarily imply a wide niche breadth
because in some scenarios, it may benefit the consumer to
focus on one abundant but under-used resource (Popa-Lisseanu
et al. 2007). The observed reduction in crayfish and
crab diet breadth in the presence of interspecific competition
could be a result of increased dietary specialization
and hence a consequent decline in the variation in diet
choice of individuals (Bolnick et al. 2010). Alternatively,
the isotopic variability could be reduced due to individuals
becoming more generalist and therefore reducing the variation
among the diets of each individual (Bolnick et al.
2010). Examination of gut contents revealed no significant
overall shift in the diets of crayfish in the presence of crabs.
Therefore, that we found significant reductions in the
trophic niche breadth of crayfish populations in the presence
of crabs in both the field experiments and field surveys
indicates that, although the overall dietary preferences of
crayfish were not altered in the presence of crabs, the individuals
within the crayfish population were tending to feed
in a more similar manner. These results were consistent
across both the field experiments and field surveys, strongly
supporting the robustness and generality of this finding.
The presence of the crabs appears to have triggered dietary
homogenization within the crayfish population. Crabs
exhibited a significant decline in diet breadth only in the
experiments and not in the field surveys. This inconsistency
in results perhaps suggests less flexibility in diet choice of
crabs compared to the crayfish.
Since the crayfish and crab species in our study ecosystem
are both relatively large decapod Crustacea, individuals
of each of the same biomass might be expected to
have similar effects on ecosystem structure and functioning.
Both species are considered important shredders, yet
invasive crayfish had a considerably greater influence on
detrital processing in our field experiments, quadrupling
rates of leaf litter breakdown compared to native crabs.
Analysis of gut contents demonstrated that this was due
to direct consumption; indeed, leaf litter is considered to
be an important part of crayfish diet when available
(Bobeldyk & Lamberti 2008). Some invasive predators
consume native shredders, causing a trophic cascade
whereby leaf litter decomposition is reduced. Crayfish can
decouple this trophic cascade by feeding directly both on
shredders and the leaf litter itself (Jackson et al. 2014).
Previous studies have found that functionally similar
sympatric crab species can interact to moderate one
anotherís impact due to consumer redundancy (Griffen &
Byers 2008). However, we found intermediate leaf litter
breakdown rates in the combined species treatment in our
field experiment suggesting there was no consumer interaction,
as was also found for pairs of crayfish in the United
Kingdom (Jackson et al. 2014). We also found that the
invasive crayfish significantly altered benthic community
structure and approximately halved invertebrate densities
compared with the native crabs. These latter findings are
consistent with previous studies on invasive crayfish in Europe
(Stenroth & NystrÄom 2003; Haddaway et al. 2012;
Moorhouse et al. 2013). In contrast, native crabs had no
effect on the structure or density of benthic assemblages,
which were similar to those in the experimental units containing
no decapod consumers. In spite of the similarities
between these decapod crustaceans, results from our field
experiments suggest that replacement of the native crabs
by the invasive crayfish will considerably alter both the
structure and functioning of African river ecosystems.
Moreover, these shifts in ecosystem structure and functioning
may even have facilitated indirectly the replacement of
the native crabs by the crayfish by reducing suitable habitat
for the crabs (Parker et al. 1999) by, for example, removing
leaf litter as refugia. Such changes also have the potential
to alter key ecosystem services such as fishery production
and water quality, both of which are extremely important
in this semi-arid region of East Africa. Many river crabs in
East Africa are already highly endangered (Cumberlidge
et al. 2009) and local biodiversity will only become increasingly
impaired as crayfish spread or are introduced further
in both rivers and lakes (Lodge et al. 2005).
In contrast to classic invasion theory, here we have
shown that competition with a native species can drive
niche constriction in invader populations without impairing
invasion success. Interactions between native crabs
and invasive crayfish caused a decline in the dietary niche
width of both species but this only resulted in a reduction
in performance in the native crabs. We conclude that both
environmental context and species interactions need to be
considered in order to predict invasion potential and the
impacts of invasive species on ecosystems.