xabstract




Largemouth bass Micropterus salmoides and smallmouth bass M. dolomieu are two

widely introduced species of fish prized for their angling potential. The introductions of

these species, although commonly done by management agencies and the public, typically

involve little or no consideration of the impacts these species may have on other species of

fish and the aquatic ecosystems. Field studies and review of literature are used to document

various direct and indirect effects of bass occurrence in reducing diversity of small-bodied

fish species, creating more homogeneous fish communities, increasing competition among

small-bodied fish, reducing energy flow to other game fishes, alterating planktonic and

benthic communities, and potentially changing habitat complexity. Discussed within is also

the fact that, although there is public concern regarding introduction of predatory species

that may affect terrestrial systems, there appears limited interest regarding the negative

impacts that bass may have on aquatic ecosystems.

xintroduction




Recreational fishing represents both a major activity

and business, particularly in North America.

Within warm and cool freshwater environments,

angling for bass, in particular largemouth bass

Micropterus salmoides and smallmouth bass M.

dolomieu, is a major focus. To facilitate angling,

management agencies often use stocking programs

to enhance existing populations and stock

lakes, reservoirs, and river systems where these

two species of bass may not occur naturally. In

addition to stocking by official agencies, many

authorized (e.g., farm ponds) and unauthorized

introductions occur with fish being moved between

waterbodies by the public. Distributions of

these two species have expanded from approximating

the Mississippi River basin, Gulf of Mexico

region, and portions of the Great Lakes basins to

include virtually all of the United States, southern

regions of Canada warm enough to support

the species, most of Mexico and central America,

large areas of Europe, southern Africa, South

America, parts of Asia and many oceanic islands

(e.g., Robbins and MacCrimmon 1974; Azuma and

Motomura 1999; Gratwicke and Marshall 2001).

These species have become some of the most

widely distributed aquatic species in the world in

order to provide angling opportunities. The management

of these species and the enhanced fishing

opportunities are generally considered a success,

but such evaluations of ìsuccessî are limited

in the breadth of their considerations. These

introductions typically have been made with limited

or no consideration about the ecological consequences

of such actions. Ironically, this symposium

represented the 25th anniversary of the publication

the first Black Bass Symposium proceedings,

the same year at which John Magnusonís

presidential address warned of the consequences

due to fish introductions (Magnuson 1976). Although

the introduction of exotics from other continents

generates considerable concern among

most resource managers and the public, there appears

to be no comparable response to moving

Micropterus spp. around in North America or elsewhere

despite their strong ecological impacts.

This paper examines several of these ecological

consequences through results from two studies,

plus published studies are draw upon extensively

in an extended discussion. Despite the species

being introduced to systems worldwide, almost

all of the studies examining the ecological

aspects of these introductions are derived from

comparative or experimental studies in North

America. This paper focuses on the direct and indirect

ecological effects attributable to black bass

and similar predators such as Northern pike Esox

lucius. Fish communities and species richness from

two sets of Ontario lakes that contain bass are contrasted

to those lakes that do not have bass present.

The findings from this bass comparison are contrasted

with the results of a trout Salvelinus presence-absence comparison from the same lakes. The

goal of this paper is not to advocate the elimination

of stocking programs entirely, but rather to

emphasize that we must consider the broader and

permanent environmental impacts due to black bass

introductions

xmethods




Drainage-basin survey: Species were sampled from

52 lakes in the Black and Hollow River drainage

basins of south-central Ontario, Canada (Figure 1).

Selected lakes had surface areas of 5 ha or greater,

and a minimum depth of 3 m or more to reduce

the probability of complete winterkill. Each lake

was sampled using baited minnow traps, plastic

traps, fine- and coarse-mesh trapnets, and multipanel

monofilament gillnets having 15 ◊ 8 m panels

ranging in size from 3.75 to 7.5 cm stretched

mesh. Lakes were sampled between three and

seven nights in duration with all gears being used

in each suitable habitat. Several lakes were

resampled during a different time of the sampling

season to assess the reliability of initial surveys due

to seasonal effects. No additional species were detected

during the resampling periods (for additional

details see Jackson 1988).

Size-restricted survey: To limit effects due to lake

size and habitat heterogeneity, a set of lakes from

the Black and Hollow River drainage (six lakes) and

adjacent Algonquin Provincial Park (eight lakes)

were chosen. These two regions are physically adjacent

and therefore share similar environmental

conditions. These lakes were restricted to those with

a maximum of 50 ha in surface area and were classified

into those known to contain or lack smallmouth

bass (MacRae 1999; MacRae and Jackson

2001). Lakes were chosen such that aside from the

presence or absence of smallmouth bass, the environmental

conditions of the two sets of lakes were

comparable in terms of surface area, depth, and

water chemistry. Areas with the most complex habitats

(i.e., submerged woody material and aquatic

vegetation) and the simplest within each lake were

located. Within these two habitat types, fishes were

first enumerated using a visual sampling technique

in which a snorkeling observer swam transects

identifying the species and counting individuals (MacRae and Jackson 2001). Following the visual

survey, baited minnow traps were placed in each

habitat type and retrieved the following day to provide

estimates of catch per unit effort. Whole-lake

estimates of species presence-absence are used here.Fish species composition was reduced to species

presence-absence because of sampling bias imposed

by each sampling gear and lake characteristics.

As a result of the bias, interlake comparisons

across gears and species are not based on reliable

estimates of relative abundance (Jackson and

Harvey 1997). In addition, multi-lake comparisons

based on presence-absence data have been found

to capture the dominant community patterns (Jackson

et al. 1992; Jackson et al. 2001). Total species

richness within each lake was compared between

lakes containing or lacking bass (both M. dolomieu

and M. salmoides). Because richness is positively

correlated to lake surface area, an analysis of covariance

(ANCOVA) was used to contrast the richness

of lakes with bass, from those lacking bass,

while controlling for the area effect. Due to the

vulnerability of cyprinids to predation, a parallel

ANCOVA was carried out contrasting the cyprinid

species richness in the two classes of lakes, relative

to surface area. To compare whether similar relationships

exist for salmonids as for bass, ANCOVAs

examining total species richness and cyprinid species

richness were done using the presence or absence

of brook trout Salvelinus fontinalis and/or lake

trout S. namaycush in the lakes.

Patterns of species composition were summarized

using multivariate ordination methods. Species

occurring in less than five percent of the lakes

were deleted as they contribute little to general

community patterns and often lead to an ìoutlierî

condition. The similarity of species from the 52

lakes in the Black and Hollow Rivers system were

quantified using the Phi similarity coefficient (denoted

as S; Jackson et al. 1989). These species have

been shown to exhibit nonrandom patterns in community

composition based on this measure (Jackson

et al. 1992) and the measure is not influenced

by species richness or by species frequency of cooccurrence

(Jackson et al. 1989) unlike more commonly

applied measures, such as Jaccardís coefficient.

The similarity measure was converted into a

distance measure by taking the square root of its

complement (i.e., the multivariate distance between

two lakes ). A principal coordinates analysis

(PCoA) was then applied to this matrix of between-species distances to graphically summarize

the similarities of the species. A similar Phi-based

distance matrix and PCoA was applied to summarize

relationships among the lakes. The species

presence-absence data from the restricted lake size

survey was summarized using a correspondence

analysis (Jackson and Harvey 1997; Legendre and

Legendre 1998). This technique has an advantage

in that positions of species and lakes can be interpreted

jointly to relate species composition directly

to the similarity of lakes.

xresults




Lake surface area was a significant factor associated

with total species richness per lake (P < 0.0001).

The increase in the number of species relative to

lake area (i.e., the regression slope) was not significantly

different in lakes with bass from lakes without

bass (P = 0.323). The lakes containing either

bass species had an average of 1.4 fewer species

(including bass) than lakes without bass, but were

not significantly different (P = 0.101) after controlling

for lake area (Figure 2a). There was no difference

(P = 0.361) in the slopes of regression lines

comparing cyprinid richness relative to lake area

for lakes with bass relative to lakes without bass.

Cyprinid richness was associated strongly with

lake area (P = 0.011), and lakes with bass averaged

2.9 fewer species of cyprinids than lakes without

bass (P < 0.0001) after controlling for lake area (Figure

2c). Tests comparing the presence or absence

of trout within these lakes showed total species

richness to be strongly related to lake area (P <

0.0001) but again had similar regression slopes (P

= 0.361). Lakes containing trout differed significantly

in the number of species present (P = 0.0001),

but lakes with trout averaged 3.2 more species (including

trout) than lakes without trout (Figure 2b).

There was no difference in the slopes (P = 0.541) of

cyprinid richness relative to lake area for lakes with

trout versus lakes without trout. Cyprinid richness

was related to lake surface area (P = 0.02) and lakes

containing trout averaged 2.3 more species of cyprinid

(P = 0.001) than lakes without trout after controlling

for lake area (Figure 2d).

The principal coordinates results of the fish

species (Figure 3) shows most of the cyprinid species

are positioned towards the left-end of Axis 1

with species such fathead minnow, northern redbelly

dace, and pearl dace being the most extreme

in their location. Species located at the opposite end of Axis 1 include both bass species and yellow

perch. Most species to the right of the center are

large-bodied and/or cold-water species, whereas

almost all species to the left are small-bodied species.

A notable exception to this trend is brook trout

that is positioned close to blacknose dace, pearl

dace, and fathead minnow. In general, the pattern

along Axis 1 is one progressing from small-bodied

species at the left end towards species of increasing

body size and piscivorous diets at the right end.

The PCoA of the lakes (Figure 4) shows a strong

contrast between lakes containing bass and those

that do not. Lakes in which bass were present (coded

as ìbassî) are positioned on the right end of Axis 1,

whereas lakes lacking bass are positioned towards

the left end. Given the results found in the fish ordination

and in results published previously (Harvey

1981; Jackson et al. 1992), a set of species has been

coded as being highly vulnerable to predation. This

set of species includes fathead minnow, pearl dace,

northern redbelly dace, and finescale dace. Lakes

containing two or more of these species are designated

as having the vulnerable ìminnowî assemblage,

whereas lakes having one or fewer of these

species and lacking bass are coded as ìother.î The

ìotherî lakes show an intermediate position between

those lakes containing the ìminnowî assemblage

and the ìbassî lakes. Four lakes contained both

the ìbassî and ìminnowî assemblages and three of

these are among the four largest lakes.The correspondence analysis shows smallmouth

bass, largemouth bass, and rock bass all positioned at the far right-end of Axis 1 (Figure 5). The establishment

of largemouth bass in one of these lakes is

a recent event and was not found in these lakes during

previous surveys (Jackson 1988). Because they

were only found in lakes classified as ìbassî in the

design, this did not compromise the ìbassî versus

ìno bassî contrast. This positioning of these species

contrasts with the positions of species such as

fathead minnow, brook stickleback, and Phoxinus

(both Phoxinus species, northern redbelly dace, P. eos,

and finescale dace, P. neogeaus, were pooled because

distinguishing between these species was impossible

during underwater surveys). The angle between

vectors joining species provides a measure of their

association. Angles close to zero indicate a positive

association between the species in the ordination

space. These species tend to co-occur and represent

assemblages found across lakes. In contrast, angles

approaching 180 degrees indicate species having

negative associations and more mutually exclusive

distributions. Iowa darter, pearl dace and brown

bullhead also show negative associations with respect

to bass occurrence, but are largely uncorrelated

with the distribution of Phoxinus, fathead minnow

and brook stickleback as shown by the vector angles

approximating 90 degrees.

The ordination plot showing the lakes (Figure

6) clearly indicates the difference between the

ìbassî and ìno bassî lakes. As with the drainage

basin survey, there is a separation between lakes

containing bass and those where bass were absent,

but the separation in the size-restricted survey is

more distinct. Positions of lakes without bass range

from the extreme left-end of Axis 1 to the middle

of Axis 1, and lower end of Axis 2. In contrast the

lakes containing bass show a compact grouping

positioned towards the right end of Axis 1. The

group of lakes containing bass shows much less

variability in their ordination position than lakes

without bass

xdiscussion

Both of the case studies presented here show strong

negative associations between small-bodied fishes,

primarily cyprinids, and smallmouth bass and

largemouth bass. Lakes containing either of the bass

species have significantly fewer species of cyprinids

than lakes lacking bass. Although bass and other

predatory species may not have viable populations

in very small north-temperate lakes due to winterkill

(Harvey 1981; Tonn and Magnuson 1983;Jackson and Harvey 1989), this pattern of reduced

species richness holds consistently across the size

range of lakes considered. Therefore, simple variation

attributable to habitat differences as a function

of lake size cannot explain the differences in

cyprinid richness. The contrast related to salmonid

presence, the other large predators in the lakes,

does not show comparable effects. In fact, lakes

with trout contain significantly more species of cyprinids,

whereas lakes with bass show fewer species,

relative to the lakes lacking either set of predators.

During summer, bass and trout occupy different

regions of these lakes due to their thermal

preferences and lake stratification. Bass occupy littoral

areas as do most of the cyprinids, whereas

trout and cyprinids have limited overlap in their

summer habitats. However, small littoral fishes

may represent significant components of the annual

lake trout diet in some lakes (Vander Zanden

et al. 1999a). Differences in habitat use and predator

thermal ecology partially explain the differences

in why trout do not show as strong a negative effect

with cyprinids as do the bass. Differences in

foraging efficiency (i.e., gape size) between these

groups of predators likely are major contributing

factors also.

However, the fact that the lakes with trout have

greater cyprinid richness than lakes without trout

raises additional questions. A possible explanation

for the enhanced richness in lakes containing salmonids

relates to fishing practices of anglers. Live

baitfish, typically cyprinids, are used by anglers fishing

for both trout and bass. It is not uncommon for

anglers to release live baitfish at the end of their

fishing, and many of these species may not be indigenous

to the lakes. These individuals may establish

breeding populations in these lakes, thereby

increasing the species richness (Litvak and Mandrak

1993). Because both trout and bass lakes would

undergo this effect (Chapleau et al. 1997), the resulting

differences in richness require that the introduced

species establish and become viable in the

trout lakes, whereas they do not in the bass lakes,

or at least not to a similar extent. Again this emphasizes

the potential differences in predatory impact.

Differences in the patterns of trout and bass

occurrence with cyprinid species are also evident

in the species composition of lakes. There is a strong

negative association between smallmouth bass and

largemouth bass with the dace species and fathead

minnow, whereas brook trout shows a strong positive

association with these cyprinids. Lakes con-taining either or both bass species tend to have very

different species composition than lakes lacking the

bass. Direct predatory effects due to bass have been

identified for lakes (Tonn and Magnuson 1983; Jackson

et al. 1992, 2001) and streams (Power et al. 1985;

Harvey et al. 1988). It has been found in stream systems

that the effects due to largemouth bass are

greater than those from smallmouth bass (Harvey

et al. 1988), but no discernible difference was found

here. The result of bass presence, via introduction

or colonization, is a change in the species composition,

often with a reduction in the diversity of species

within the lakes (i.e., alpha diversity) (Chapleau

et al. 1997; Whittier et al. 1997). Lakes where bass

have been stocked or colonized from stocked populations

also show less variation in their community

composition than lakes without bass (Figure

6). This indicates that lakes containing bass have

more homogeneous communities than lakes where

bass have not established. Radomski and Goeman

(1995) showed a reduction in among-lake diversity

(beta diversity) or increased homogenization of fish

communities as a result of the stocking of walleye,

and Rahel (2000) found a general homogenization

of fish faunas across the United States, largely as a

result of fish introductions.

Although the direct effects of bass are most

readily detected, there are many indirect effects that

impact on other fish species and additional components

of aquatic ecosystems. Most of these indirect

effects are detected through experimental comparisons

as they are not as readily detected in largescale

comparative approaches. The risk associated

with predation and foraging requirements are conflicting

demands on small fish (Fraser and Cerri

1982; He and Kitchell 1990). In lakes with large littoral

predators, small-bodied fishes are often found

to alter their choice of habitat and foraging behavior.

Prey fish remain in more complex habitat because

it provides greater protection from predation

by bass (MacRae and Jackson 2001). Fish restricted

to areas with greater amounts of macrophyte

or woody material reduces the range of resources

available for foraging, thereby increasing

intra- and interspecific competition between smallbodied

fishes (Savino and Stein 1989; He and

Kitchell 1990; He and Wright 1992; MacRae and

Jackson 2001). Nocturnal foraging in other habitats

may offset this negative effect somewhat, but

will not eliminate it. In turn, this habitat restriction

contributes to reduced growth and fecundity

of these species, and potentially reduced population

size (MacRae 1999). Reductions in population

size of small-bodied species can arise to direct predation

effects and due to reduced foraging success.

The importance of these complex habitats for

smaller species increases when bass are present

(Weaver et al. 1997), however, the lakes that are

popular for recreational fishing are also the same

ones that tend to have residential developments.

People tend to remove many of these complexhabitat

areas to enhance their use of the shoreline

(Christensen et al. 1996). Therefore, while the importance

of these habitats increases with bass presence,

these habitats are frequently reduced in number

and size. This reduction of habitat complexity,

or habitat homogenization, enhances the effects

due to bass predation. Fewer patches, with increased

distances among patches, reduces the probability

of individuals dispersing successfully between

patches. In larger lakes these patch habitats

may function in a metapopulation context, but the

combination of increased predation and habitat

modification reduces the probability of small fish

metapopulations (and meta-assemblages) being

maintained (Jackson et al. 2001). Increased emigration

of small-bodied species has been shown to

occur when pike (He and Kitchell 1990) or largemouth

bass (Power et al. 1985) are introduced. Prey

species may move from lakes into adjoining

streams or nearby lakes if predators are absent from

these systems. In general, it can be expected that a

reduction in the numbers of small-bodied species,

reductions in the numbers of individuals, reductions

in growth and production due to predation

and restriction to limited habitats will occur.

Indirect effects extend to large-bodied species

whose adults are not susceptible to predation by

bass. The reduction in the abundance and production

of small-bodied fishes, and their restriction to

complex habitats may alter the availability of these

fishes as food for other predatory species. During

spring and fall, lake trout and cyprinids often overlap

in their habitat providing the potential for trout

to feed on these species. The presence of bass has

been found to alter the diet of lake trout (Vander

Zanden et al. 1999a; 1999b). Because bass may

eliminate some cyprinid species or reduce their

abundance via various direct and indirect effects,

there may be reduced availability of small fish as

food for trout. Lake trout either experience reduced

resource availability or must switch to feeding on

less optimal prey (Figure 7). Depending on the

availability of pelagic forage fishes, such as cisco,

lake trout may use zooplankton as their primary

source of food. This switch to energetically less

profitable resources has major implications for their

growth and reproduction. Such effects by bass on littoral cyprinid assemblages, as well as direct predation

due to smaller body size, may explain the

negative association between bass and brook trout

occurrence because of increased biotic interactions

(Brown et al. 2000). Brook trout have been shown

to be less successful when present with various littoral

species with whom they must compete for

food (Bourke et al. 1999).

Indirect effects also occur in other ecosystem

components, particularly on lower trophic levels

involving pelagic and benthic invertebrate communities

(see Matthews 1998 pages 604ñ611 for a review

of associated trophic changes). The trophic

cascade is perhaps the best-known phenomenom

of top-down impacts stemming from introductions

of top predators (Power et al. 1985; Carpenter et al.

1987; Findlay et al. 1994; Mittlebach et al.1985;

Schindler et al. 1997). The changes in abundance

of small fishes and changes in their foraging behavior

can contribute to differences in zooplankton

structure. Fish typically select large-bodied

zooplankton such as Daphnia. When planktivorous

fish are abundant, large-bodied zooplankton are

eaten preferentially and, therefore, are rare in abundance

relative to small-bodied zooplankton. Larger

cladocerans are generally considered to be more

effective grazers on phytoplankton, so changes in

the zooplankton size-structure result in changes in

the phytoplankton communities. Such changes in

trophic structure can lead to increased water clarity

as a result of predators such as bass being introduced.

This increased clarity could provide a positive

feedback for the bass and enhance their ability

to locate prey, thereby providing further pressure

on the small-bodied fishes.

Differences in fish communities associated

with bass and other littoral piscivores may contribute

to differences in benthic invertebrate communities

also (Jackson and Harvey 1993). Various studies

have suggested changes in the zoobenthic communities

ranging from changes in chironomid

abundance to large-bodied invertebrates such as

odonates (Morin 1984a, 1984b). Crayfish abundance,

or their trapability, is reduced when bass

are present (Stein and Magnuson 1976; Mather and

Stein 1993; Somers and Green 1993). Changes in

crayfish abundance or foraging behavior can be

important given they are major invertivores and

grazers of periphyton and macrophytes (Hill and

Lodge 1995; Nystrom et al. 1996; Dorn and

Mittlebach 1999). Modifications of this grazing behavior

may contribute to differences in macrophyte

abundance and density and therefore, changes in

habitat complexity. Effects on invertebrate communities

can be quite complicated as reduced abundances

and modified behavior of predatory invertebrates

due to bass presence can also reduce invertebrate

predation on smaller invertebrate species

(Jackson and Harvey 1993). Therefore, positive

impacts on some groups of invertebrates may arise

indirectly. Similar negative interactions between

bass and small fish species (e.g., Campostoma) lead

to changes in the grazing behavior with the result

being increased accumulation of large algae,

thereby providing more complex habitat for many

small species (Power et al. 1985; Gelwick and

Matthews 1992). Effects are not limited to purely

aquatic groups either, because predators can affect

the success of amphibian species (Semlitsch 2000

and references therein).

Are aquatic systems different from terrestrial

ones ñor simply considered differently? The extent

to which largemouth and smallmouth bass are

introduced to aquatic systems in North American and elsewhere is considerable and matched only

by their apparent impact on these systems. Their

impact ranges from loss of biodiversity to alterations

of energy flow to changes in habitat structure.

A species having a comparable impact in the

terrestrial system would be the wild boar Sus scrofa,

given that it is a species of interest due to the associated

recreational hunting possibilities. Boar alter

the habitat in which they live, cause local extinctions,

and change trophic dynamics and energy

flow of the ecosystem. However, there are many

efforts to eliminate introduced populations of this

species because of the recognized adverse impact

on the environment. Certainly there is not support

for widespread introduction of the species throughout

North America as its adverse impacts are clear

and the ìcostsî associated with the introduction

of this species outweigh the benefits, both at the

ecosystem level and the societal level (see Sweitzer

et al. 2000 and references therein). The negative ecological

effects on the terrestrial system are clearly

visible and recognized. In contrast, the effects of

black bass introductions may be comparable within

aquatic systems, but they continue to be widely

stocked and introduced, both legally and illegally.

Part of this difference may be due to the misconception

that fish do not move between lakes (see

He and Kitchell 1990; Jackson et al. 2001 for discussions)

or the fact that the impacts by black bass

are less visible to the public. There is clear recognition

that introducing nonindigenous predators into

aquatic systems may have major ecological consequences

(Moyle 1986; Crossman 1991; Stiassny

1996), but there appears to be little public awareness

about the ecological impact that these commonly

stocked species are having. Effects below

the waterís surface are less noticeable to the public

and actions occur within aquatic systems that

would not be tolerated in terrestrial systems (e.g.,

trawlers impacts on the ocean floor habitat and

biota). This case of ìout of sight ñout of mindî may

explain the dichotomy in how terrestrial and

aquatic systems are considered with respect to introducing

major predators.

=#."$1,&#.,

The presence of bass has been shown to have adverse

impacts for many natural components of

aquatic ecosystems. These effects have been noted

through various comparative studies examining

fish communities (or other aquatic groups) in lakes

with or without bass, as well as through experimental

manipulations. Although many bass introductions

have been made by management agencies,

currently the rapid expansion in many areas

is due to unauthorized introductions. The loss of

biodiversity and homogenization of our ecosystems

can be linked to these introductions. As well as

these impacts on small-bodied species, there is evidence

indicating major effects on other sport fishes,

e.g., lake trout, brook trout, walleye. These species

tend to be more common at the northern range of

the bass distributions. However, given the current

northerly expansion of bass and their potential for

much wider distribution under climate change scenarios,

there may be considerable risk to northern

ecosystems. In order to limit the expansion of bass

populations into new systems, it is critical that more

stringent management be applied. In particular, we

need to increase the awareness of anglers and the

general public regarding the adverse effects of bass

introductions (including ecological and recreational),

rather than simply relying on the perceived

benefits from angling.