xabstract




Reed invasion is a common phenomenon of open streams with disturbed riparian vegetation in river

catchments. Knowledge of the effects of such vegetation change on aquatic communities is fundamental to

river management. Macroinvertebrate fauna in Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. and open bank

habitats were examined in three rivers in central Victoria in order to understand the effect of such littoral

habitat on macroinvertebrates. Data were analysed using Partially Nested Factorial ANOVA with season,

river and habitats as main effects. Habitat structure had a significant effect (p<0.05) on macroinvertebrate

species richness, however this was not seasonally consistent across the three rivers. There was a significant

increase (p<0.05) in macroinvertebrate taxa richness in Phragmites habitats during winter and spring

seasons. Total abundance of taxa showed no consistent significant differences in the two habitats. Results of

Canonical Analysis of Principle Coordinates indicated significant differences (p<0.05) in macroinvertebrate

assemblages between Phragmites and bare bank habitats in all seasons. Habitat selection by taxa

could be related to the microphysical environment of the habitats. This study suggests that reed beds create

important littoral habitat structures which support diverse macroinvertebrate assemblages

xintroduction




Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. is one

of the common native reeds of open streams and

wetlands worldwide (Sainty & Jacobs, 1981).

There is increasing evidence to suggest that riparian

disturbance, alteration of natural hydrologic

regime, soil salinization and increased sedimentation

favour invasion and continued spread of

Phragmites in lotic systems (Roman et al., 1984;

McNabb & Batterson, 1991; Saltonstall, 2003).

Invasion of Phragmites in open reaches with low

riparian vegetation cover has been observed in

many river catchments in Victoria (CALP, 1997).

Redistribution of Phragmites in rivers managed

for irrigation has been observed in South Eastern

Australia (Roberts, 2000). However, quantitative

studies on the effects of such redistribution on

river health and aquatic biodiversity are limited

(Roberts, 2000).

Phragmites tends to reduce plant diversity in

affected areas but its overall impact is poorly

understood (Ailstock et al., 2001). There is evidence

to suggest that Phragmites is capable of

changing the physico-chemical environment of its

surroundings through the production of detritus

and capturing of sediments (Weinstein & Balletto,

1999; Rooth & Stevenson, 2000) which can influence

the utilization of this habitat by insects, fish,

birds and other wildlife. Benoit & Askins (1999)found that biodiversity of flowering plants and

birds were reduced in Phragmites dominant

marshes. Several authors have reported that

larval and juvenile fish usage of marshes has been

affected by Phragmites invasion (Able & Hagan,

2003; Able et al., 2003; Raichel et al., 2003).

Angradi et al. (2001) found that diversity of benthic

macroinvertebrates was lower in Phragmites than

Spartina alterniflora dominant habitats. However,

there is also evidence to support the view that

Phragmites has a positive impact on the ability of

marshes to function as habitats for fauna (Able &

Hagen, 2000). Meyer et al. (2001) showed that fish

species composition was not affected by Phragmites

invasion. Wainright et al. (2000) reported that

Phragmites may contribute to the food chain in

marsh systems. Some biologists regard Phragmites

beds as important habitats for wildlife (Roman

et al., 1984; Marks et al., 1994). As a result, many

reed swamps are given special conservation status,

for example as Sites of Special Scientific Interest

(SSSI) under the Ramsar Convention, Special

Protected Areas or as national or local nature reserves

(Arnold & Ormerod, 1997). In most of these

cases conservation importance is based on botanical,

ornithological or terrestrial invertebrate criteria,

which figure strongly in selection and

management. By contrast, knowledge of aquatic

invertebrates in reed beds in lotic systems is limited.

Given these scientific uncertainties, research efforts

need to focus on the ecological benefits and losses

associated with Phragmites in lotic systems, especially

the aquatic macroinvertebrate communities,

for developing management strategies.

Macroinvertebrate species richness, abundance

and community composition associated with

Phragmites reed beds and open bare bank habitats

were assessed in three selected fourth to fifth order

streams in central Victoria, Australia, during summer,

autumn, winter and spring seasons of 2004.

xmethods



Birch Creek is a major tributary of the northward

flowing Tullaroop Creek system in the upper

catchment of the Loddon River. The riparian

vegetation includes native Eucalyptus spp., Acacia

spp., Callistemon spp., Leptospermum spp. and

exotic Salix spp. (willows), with intermittent reed

dominant stretches. The dominant land uses

adjacent to the creek are grazing and cropping.

Jim Crow Creek is also a tributary of the Loddon

River, containing native vegetation, exotic willows

and intermittent reed beds. It largely flows through

public land. The East Moorabool is a branch of

the Moorabool River, which originates in the

Central Highlands. It flows south through native

forest and agricultural areas and has stretches

dominated by Phragmites (Fig. 1).Two sites (50 m reach) in each of the three creeks

were selected for sampling. Each site had stretches

of Phragmites and bare banks. Twelve samples

were collected from each site with six samples from

each habitat type. Sampling was carried out during

summer, autumn, winter and spring seasons of

2004. Samples were collected using a 20 cm

20 cm horizontal metal frame attached to a

sampler with a 250 l mesh net (Surber sampler).

The area inside the sample frame was excavated to

5 cm depth and the whole sample together with the

portion retained in the net as a result of site disturbance

was collected and sealed in a polythene

bag. Phragmites was sampled by cutting the above

ground portion of the plant and any macroinvertebrates

attached were washed off and included in

the sample. The Phragmites leaves were separated

from the sample so that coarse particulate organic

matter (CPOM) and fine particulate organic matter

(FPOM) could be measured. All samples were

transported to the laboratory for sorting. Dissolved

oxygen, pH, conductivity, temperature,

flow within habitat, average stream flow and depth

were also recorded in situ. In the laboratory,

samples were sieved (minimum sieve size 250 l)

and macroinvertebrates were separated and preserved

in 70% alcohol. The taxa present in each

sample were identified to the lowest possible taxonomic

level (Pinder & Brinkhurst, 1994; Cranston,

1996; Dean & Suter, 1996; Smith, 1996;

CSIRO, 1999; Hawking & Theischinger, 1999;

Gooderham & Tsyrlin, 2002). The remaining

fraction of the samples was separated according

to the particle size as coarse particular matter

fraction (>1 mm) and fine particular matter
fraction (1 mmñ250 l) and air dried for 1 day and

oven dried at 105 C until constant weight was

attained. After recording the dry weight, each

fraction was ashed at 550 C for 6 h and ash free

dry weight (AFDW) was recorded for each fraction.

CPOM and FPOM content were calculated

and then percentages of CPOM and FPOM were

derived.Partially Nested Factorial ANOVA experimental

design was used to analyse data. The factors considered

in the model were season (four levels,

fixed), river (three levels, random), sites (two levels,

random, nested within river), and habitat (two

levels, fixed). For a seasonal sampling event,

samples were collected within three consecutive

days of a season to counteract the effect of within

season variation. With six samples from each

habitat a total of 276 samples were collected during

all seasons. Due to high flows, Site 2 of Birch

Creek could not be sampled during winter and

these sections of data were considered missing

during analysis. Macroinvertebrate taxa recorded

in the study were considered as variables in the

analysis.Macroinvertebrate community assemblage differences

were assessed using the direct ordination

procedure of Canonical Analysis of Principle

Co-ordinates (CAP). This technique allows (i)

testing for differences among assemblages (ii)

identification of taxa most highly associated with

the effects of interest (habitats in this analysis) (iii)

visualization of the between and within group variation

and (iv) a discriminant analysis (Anderson &

Robinson, 2003; Anderson & Willis, 2003).

CAP analysis was conducted in two ways for

community analysis in this study. First, discriminant

analysis was conducted using CAP where the

focus was on discriminating between habitats

(Phragmites and bare bank) for each river separately

during different seasons. Secondly, CAP was

used to determine seasonal associations of taxa

with each habitat type using the data pooled

across the three rivers. The taxa highly associated

with habitat type were identified using correlation

between the individual taxon abundance and the

canonical axis separating habitats. These correlations

were averaged across seasons to calculate the

mean correlation value for each taxon. To examine

the community gradients Principle Coordinates

Analysis (PCoA) (Gower, 1966) was employed and

indirect ordination plots were generated. Both

CAP and PCoA were conducted using the CAP

package developed by Anderson (2003). In all

cases, the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity coefficient was

used.Differences in species richness and total abundance

among habitats were assessed using Partially

Nested Factorial ANOVA design. Total abundance

values were log transformed log(1+x)

before analysis to counteract the effect of highly

dominant taxa. These univariate tests were done

using the SPSS statistical package using general

linear models. Posterior pair-wise comparisons

(t-test) were done to estimate differences among

groups in selected factors which were significant in

the ANOVA.Effects of physical variables on macroinvertebrate

species richness in each habitat type were calculated

using Multiple Regression Analysis. The

physical variables considered were; flow within the

habitat, average stream flow, depth of each habitat

type, pH, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, temperature,

CPOM, FPOM, % CPOM and % FPOM.

xresults



The physical and chemical characteristics of sites

are summarized in Figure 2. Average depth of

Phragmites habitats varied between 20ñ40 cm and

5ñ20 cm for bare bank habitats. pH values ranged

in the two habitats from 7.5 to 8.5. Conductivity

ranged between 38 and 1750 lS/cm during seasons

with higher summer and autumn values and lower

values during winter and spring. Temperature
 varied between 8 and 25 C with lowest values

recorded during winter. These parameters, with

the exception of depth, did not show marked differences

among habitats. There was flow in all

three rivers during winter and spring but very little

or no flow during summer and autumn. Percentage

CPOM and FPOM recorded in Phragmites habitats

were higher than open banks in most sites.
Eighty-seven macroinvertebrate taxa were recorded

in sites sampled in the three rivers with 54

taxa in Birch Creek, 62 in Jim Crow Creek and 69

in Moorabool. Seventy-eight taxa were recorded in

Phragmites habitats and 72 in bare bank habitats.

Fourteen taxa were exclusively found in Phragmites

habitats and nine in bare bank habitats.

When considering main factors, a significant

proportion of variation of species richness and

total abundance of taxa was explained by the

habitats (partial g2 for species richness=0.94; total

abundance of taxa=0.87). The factors, which

made the next greatest contribution to the variation

of species richness and total abundance of

taxa were River followed by Site and Season

effects (Tables 1 and 2).

There was a significant effect (p<0.05) of

habitat on species richness (Table 1; Fig. 3a).However, effect of habitat was not consistent

across sites and during different seasons (signifi-

cant seasonsite (river)habitat interaction).

During summer, Sites 1 and 2 of Birch Creek

showed significant increase (p<0.05) in species

richness in Phragmites habitats compared to bare

bank habitats. During autumn Moorabool sites

showed significant increase in species richness in

Phragmites habitats compared to bare bank habitats.

However, during winter and spring in all sites

Phragmites habitats showed increase in species

richness.

Habitat had no clear consistent significant effect

on total abundance of taxa in either habitat

(Table 2; Fig. 3b). However, there was a significant

seasonhabitatsite interaction. During autumn,

sites 4, 5 and 6 showed significant increase in total

abundance in bare bank habitats compared to

Phragmites habitats. During winter, site 4 and

during spring, sites 5 and 6 showed significant

increase in total abundance compared to bare bank

habitats.

There was also a significant seasonriver

interaction in species richness and total abundance

of taxa (p<0.05).When considering the distribution of major groups

of taxa between the two habitats, in all seasons the

Amphipoda were the dominant group and made

the major contribution to total number of individuals,

accounting for more than 50% of the total in some sites (Fig. 4). The Odonata was mostly

found associated with Phragmites habitat and

Gastropoda and Bivalvia were abundant in this

habitat during winter and spring. When considering

the distribution of Plecoptera, Oligochaeta,

Coleoptera and Hemiptera (dominated by Corixidae)

in two habitats, they were more abundant in

bare bank habitats and Hemiptera was more

prominent during summer and autumn seasons.

Decapoda was more common in Phragmites habitat

in all seasons.

Effect of habitat on macroinvertebrate community

assemblages

Phragmites and bare bank macroinvertebrate

community assemblages showed significant differences

(p<0.05) in all sites except autumn in Birch

Creek (Table 3). Taxa allocation success in CAP

plots was higher during winter, spring and summer

but lower in autumn, indicating higher separation

of taxa in two habitats during summer, winter and

spring seasons. Jim Crow Creek and Moorabool

River habitats showed lower misclassification rates

compared to Birch Creek habitats. Figures 5 and 6

show PCoA plots of macroinvertebrate community

assemblages associated with the two habitats

in different rivers during different seasons. Even

though the sites were selected randomly in streams,

assemblages also show separation according to

sites in PCoA plots where habitat separation

sometimes overlaps. However, CAP results indicated

significant differences (p<0.05) in the two

communities of the two habitats in all the sites

throughout the seasons sampled.

Table 4 shows the correlation of each taxon

with habitat type. Correlations of taxa with

canonical axes showed that, Lestidae, Planorbidae

(Gyraulus sp.), Coenagrionidae, some species of

Limnephilidae Tanypodinae, Sialidae, Physidae

(Physa acuta Draparnaud), Sphaeriidae (Pisidium

sp.) and Atyidae (Paratya australiensis Kemp) had

a relatively higher association with Phragmites

habitats (mean correlation coefficient with canonical

axis >0.2). Ancylidae (Ferrissia sp.), Leptophlebiidae

(Atalophlebia sp.), Limnephilidae,

Ceinidae (Austrochiltonia sp.), Leptophlebiidae

(Atalophlebia australis Eaton), Baetidae, Caenidae

(Tasmanocoenis sp.) and Calamoceratidae showed

moderate association (mean correlation coefficient

with canonical axis >0.1) with Phragmites habitats

while Caenidae (Wundacaenis sp.) and Orthocladiinae

showed poor correlation with Phragmites

habitats (mean correlation coefficient with canonical

axis <0.1). This was further confirmed by their

correlation with bare banks in some seasons.

Symphitoneuria sp., Psychodidae, Phreodrilidae

(Antarctodrilus proboscidea Brinkhurst & Fulton),

Tubificidae, Psephenidae (Sclerocyphon sp.),

Lumbriculidae (Lumbriculus variegates Mullar),

Tipulidae and Dixidae showed higher association

(mean correlation coefficient with canonical axis

>0.2) with open bare bank habitats. Dytiscidae

(Rhantus sp., and Necterosoma sp.), Phreodrilidae,

Simuliidae, Notonectidae, Dytiscidae larvae,

Corixidae, Paramelitidae, Scirtidae and Elmidae

were moderately correlated (mean correlation

coefficient with canonical axis >0.1) with bare

bank sites.

Effects of physical variables on macroinvertebrate

species richness

The regression was highly significant for physical

variables in each habitat type (p<0.01). In

Phragmites habitats physical variables explained

42% of the total variance of species richness

(Table 5). However, in bare bank habitats only

11% of the total variance of species richness was

explained by physical variables (Table 6). When

considering all physical variables, in Phragmites

habitats, only average stream flow, pH, dissolved

oxygen, temperature and % CPOM content

accounted for significant proportion of explained

variation of species richness within habitat. In bare

bank habitats only dissolved oxygen concentration

showed a significant proportion of explained variation

and flow within the habitat was marginal.

xdiscussion

The effects of change in Phragmites habitats on

macroinvertebrates have been reported by many

authors but have provided contrasting results.

Dvora¥k & Best (1982), Boulton & Lloyd (1991)

and Fel et al. (1998) reported that Phragmites

dominated sites had more abundant invertebrates

than non-Phragmites sites due to the provision of

suitable physical habitat and usable food resources for semi-aquatic detritus feeders and algae feeders.

However, Warren et al. (2001) reported that

macroinvertebrates were not affected by the

Phragmites expansion. Ailstock et al. (2001) also

supported this view and showed no direct change

in macroinvertebrate abundance and diversity

with the expansion of Phragmites in fresh water

wetlands. However, Chambers et al. (1999) and

Osgood et al. (2002) reported that Phragmites

invasion of tidal freshwater wetlands results in a

reduction in insects. However, no comprehensive

study has been carried out to investigate the effect

of Phragmites habitats on macroinvertebrate

communities in lotic systems. Some of the confusion

over the effect of Phragmites on aquatic

communities in past studies can be explained

through the results of the present study.

In this study, species richness and total abundance

of macroinvertebrates associated with two

habitats responded differently to the seasonal

effects. This was reflected by the relative increase

of species richness and abundance of taxa in

Phragmites habitats during winter and spring in

comparison to summer and autumn seasons. This

may be explained by the highly dependent nature

of macroinvertebrates to temporal changes associated

with rivers such as flow, food availability,

and refuge selection. Flow has a major effect on

refuge selection and habitat selection behaviour of

macroinvertebrates (Sand-Jensen & Mebus, 1996).

Macrophytes provide refuge for macroinvertebrates

from flow and also retain drifting insects

(Greg & Rose, 1982). In the present study,

Regression Analysis indicated that average stream

flow had a significant positive effect on macroinvertebrate

species richness in Phragmites habitat.

For bare bank habitats this effect was non-significant.

Flow within habitat had a marginal negative

effect on species richness, in bare bank habitats.

During winter and spring there was an increase in

the average stream flow in all rivers sampled

except Moorabool sites during winter. This suggests

that increased stream flow has contributed to

the increase in species richness in Phragmites

habitats during winter and spring. It can be

expected that taxa in structurally unstable bare

bank habitats were more affected by the local flow

conditions and hence reduction in species richness

in this habitat during high flows as suggested by

negative correlation of species richness with local

flow conditions in bare bank habitats. Even

though pH, dissolved oxygen concentration, temperature

and % CPOM content had a significant

effect on species richness on Phragmites habitats

these effects were negative.

Total number of taxa showed an inconsistent

pattern between the two habitats. During summer

and autumn, Amphipoda made the greatest contribution to total abundance. In addition to

that, in bare bank habitats, especially during

summer and autumn, Coleoptera and Hemiptera

also contributed most to the total abundance of

taxa and corixids dominated the population of

Hemiptera. They are predators and their presence

may be related to their search for food i.e.,

zooplankton which may be more prevalent in the

backwater/bank habitats than in the macrophytes.

This suggests that localized effects, triggered by

seasonal effects make a major contribution to

particular taxa and hence favour increase of their

population. However, some taxa were more

abundant than others and mask the abundance of

less frequent taxa. This may explain some inconsistent

patterns of total abundance of taxa between

the two habitats during different seasons.

Macroinvertebrate community assemblages

associated with Phragmites and bare bank habitats

showed significant differences in assemblage

structure in all seasons observed. As suggested by

the misclassification rates in CAP procedure this

difference was more prominent during summer,

winter and spring seasons. This suggests that, even

though total abundance of taxa and species richness

showed no differences in some seasons, reed beds have a significant influence on the shape of

macroinvertebrate community composition. A

similar trend has been observed by Meyerson et al.

(2000) who suggested varying use of this habitat by

different taxa. In this study, correlation of taxa

with different habitats showed different levels of

association with different habitats. Taxa having a

high correlation with a particular habitat, can be

considered as habitat selective taxa, those with

poor correlations can be considered habitat generalists.

This study indicated that Gyraulus sp.,

Austrolestes analis Rhumbur, Coenagrionidae,

Isostictidae, Tanypodinae, Sialidae, Physa acuta,

Pisidium sp., Paratya australiensis , Limnophilidae

and Glyptophysa sp. were more consistently associated

with Phragmites habitat and Symphitoneuria

sp., Psychodidae, A. proboscidea, Tubificidae,

Sclerocyphon sp., L. variegates, Tipulidae and

Dixidae with bare bank habitats.

The differences in macroinvertebrate community

assemblages observed in the two habitats can

be related to many factors. Relationship between

detrital food and macroinvertebrate abundance

has been studied by many authors. Flecker (1984)

found a significant positive correlation between

insect abundance and detritus for most invertebrate

taxa. However, this relationship between

benthic macroinvertebrates and detritus often

depends on the nature of the stream and the time

of the year. Studies comparing the benthic fauna

to detritus have also resulted in conflicting conclusions.

Egglishaw (1968) and Fahy (1975) found

significant correlations between insects and detritus

whereas Peterson & Cummins (1974) and

Pennak (1977) failed to detect a significant relationship.

Even though high organic matter content

in the form of CPOM and FPOM was detected in

Phragmites beds compared to bare bank habitats

in this study, species richness only increased during

winter and spring. Regression analysis indicated a

negative correlation between species richness and

% CPOM content in Phragmites habitats and taxa

in bare bank habitats did not show association

between species richness and CPOM content. This

suggests that in addition to the levels of organic

matter, other regulatory factors have a role in

habitat selection.

Some authors suggest that the higher abundance

of macroinvertebrates in macrophyte habitats

are related to the shelter provided from high

currents (Harrod, 1964; Gregg, 1982). This is

supported by the distribution of some taxa in the

two habitats investigated. Pisidium sp., P. acuta,

Gyraulus sp., Ferrissia sp. were known to prefer

low flows and in this study they were found to

associated with Phragmites habitats in most seasons.

Flow is not only associated with habitat selection

but also with food acquiring habits. Simulium

sp., Pisidium sp. and oligochaetes feed on FPOM

but their mechanism of acquiring this is known to

be different. For example Simulium sp. captures

food by filtering FPOM flowing through its cephalic

fans whereas Pisidium sp. create their own

current and filter settling material in slow flowing

backwater (Takeshi & Pinder, 1985). This may

explain correlation of these taxa with open banks

and Phragmites habitats, respectively. Gyraulus sp.

and Ancylidae are periphyton feeders and preference

for slow water may be the reason for their

higher association with Phragmites habitats. In

contrast Oligochaeta such as Tubificidae and

Lumbriculidae (L. variegates) consume the organic

material by ingesting the benthic sediments. Since

Phragmites habitats had higher levels of FPOM

content it was expected that Oligochaeta were

more abundant in Phragmites habitats. The present

study showed oligochaetes were more abundant

in bare bank habitats however, the reason for

such relationship is not clear. Able & Ragan (2000)

reported that decapod crustaceans were not

affected by Phragmites invasion in Mullica River

in Southern New Jersey USA. The present study

indicated that Decapoda (P. australiensis) were

highly associated with reed habitats. This species

has a preference for decaying organic matter and

low flow which may explain its association with

Phragmites habitats (Gooderham & Tsyrlin, 2002).

Some studies show that Chironominae are

highly associated with reed/macrophyte habitats

(Bergey et al., 1992; Sloey et al., 1997). However,

results in this study indicated an inconsistent pattern

of Chironominae distribution in the two

habitats, influenced by a seasonal pattern. They

preferred bare bank habitats during summer and

autumn but reed beds during winter and spring.

The association of Corixidae and Coleoptera

with open bank habitats during summer and

autumn may be attributed to their capacity to

withstand anaerobic conditions during the period of summer low oxygen levels due to their surface

breathing behaviour. Another possible reason

could be the plentiful food availability during

these seasons. They are known to be predators

(Gooderham & Tsyrlin, 2002) and benefit by

capturing prey trapped in low summer flows,

which create stagnant water pools which trap

many other insects.

Macrophytes tend to provide protection for

macroinvertebrates from predation (Benke, 1976).

However, this study showed that predators such as

Odonata, Sialidae, Corydalidae, Tanypodinae

were consistently associated with Phragmites

habitats. Invertebrate predators hunting for the

other representatives of phytophilous microfauna

are also found in macrovegetation (Tokeshi &

Pinder, 1985). Predatory beetles, heteropterans,

dragonflies and megalopterans were associated

with macrophyte beds in a study by Linhart et al.

(1998). These may have important influences over

the structure of macroinvertebrate community

composition and trophic relationships among taxa

in those habitats. However, it is necessary to look

at the functional feeding group composition of

macroinvertebrates to further clarify and predict

such compositional differences.

Conclusion

Most previous studies to understand the role of

Phragmites on aquatic biota were on lentic environments

(Marks et al., 1994; Able & Hagan, 2000,

2003; Angradi et al., 2001; Able et al., 2003).

However, there has been no comprehensive study

of the impact of Phragmites on littoral macroinvertebrate

communities in lotic systems. The

present study suggests that Phragmites invasion in

streams could result in macroinvertebrate community

composition changes. However, the effect

of this habitat on macroinvertebrate species richness

and abundance is governed by many other

factors operating in lotic environment associated

with seasonal effects. This provides reasons for

confusion of views in literature regarding the

effects of Phragmites on aquatic biodiversity

(Roman et al., 1984; Marks et al., 1994; Able &

Hagan, 2000, 2003; Wainright et al., 2000;

Angradi et al., 2001; Able et al., 2003; Raichel

et al., 2003). Many of the previous studies have

not taken in to account the temporal variability

associated with these habitats (Benoit & Askins,

1999; Able & Hagan, 2000, 2003; Able et al., 2003;

Raichel et al., 2003). The present study suggested

that, even though species richness and abundance

were comparable in both habitats during seasons

such as summer and autumn, they supported a

distinct macroinvertebrate community assemblage.

Therefore reed invasion in streams can result in

macroinvertebrate compositional changes in

stream littoral habitats.