xabstract
With ecosystems increasingly supporting multiple
invasive species, interactions among invaders could
magnify or ameliorate the undesired consequences for
native communities and ecosystems. We evaluated the
individual and combined effects of rusty crayfish (Orconectes
rusticus) and Chinese mystery snails [Bellamya
(=Cipangopaludina) chinensis] on native snail communities
(Physa, Helisoma and Lymnaea sp.) and ecosystem
attributes (algal chlorophyll a and nutrient concentrations).
Both invaders are widespread in the USA and commonly
co-occur within northern temperate lakes, underscoring the
importance of understanding their singular and joint
effects. An outdoor mesocosm experiment revealed that
while the two invaders had only weakly negative effects
upon one another, both negatively affected the abundance
and biomass of native snails, and their combined presence
drove one native species to extinction and reduced a second
by [95%. Owing to its larger size and thicker shell, adult
Bellamya were protected from crayfish attack relative to
native species (especially Physa and Lymnaea), suggesting
the co-occurrence of these invaders in nature could have
elevated consequences for native communities. The per
capita impacts of Orconectes (a snail predator) on native
snails were substantially greater than those of Bellamya (a
snail competitor). Crayfish predation also had a cascading
effect by reducing native snail biomass, leading to
increased periphyton growth. Bellamya, in contrast,
reduced periphyton biomass, likely causing a reduction in
growth by native lymnaeid snails. Bellamya also increased
water column N:P ratio, possibly because of a low P
excretion rate relative to native snail species. Together,
these findings highlight the importance of understanding
interactions among invasive species, which can have significant
community- and ecosystem-level effects.
xintroduction
Biological invasions are widely recognized as a significant
component of anthropogenic environmental change (Elton
1958; Vitousek et al. 1997; Byers et al. 2002). Worldwide
increases in the number and geographic extent of invasions
represent a major threat to native biodiversity in freshwater
ecosystems, which collectively have higher rates of species
endangerment and extinction than terrestrial or marine
environments (Ricciardi and Rasmussen 1998; Dudgeon
et al. 2006). In the US alone, more than 900 non-indigenous
species have been introduced into inland waters and
are collectively responsible for significant economic and
ecological damage (Pimental et al. 2000; http://nas.er.usgs.
gov/). Although research on biological invasions is often
weighted toward terrestrial ecosystems (e.g., Puth and Post
2005), the importance of understanding and preventing
Communicated by Craig Osenberg.
P. T. J. Johnson (&)
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado,
Ramaley N122, Boulder, CO 80309-0334, USA
e-mail: pieter.johnson@colorado.edu
J. D. Olden
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences,
University of Washington, Box 355020,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
C. T. Solomon  M. J. Vander Zanden
Center for Limnology, University of Wisconsin,
680 North Park Street, Madison, WI 53706-1492, USA
123
Oecologia (2009) 159:161ñ170
DOI 10.1007/s00442-008-1176-x
non-indigenous species introductions in aquatic systems is
underscored by the increasing number and rate of freshwater
invasions, the high endemicity of freshwater
ecosystems, and the importance of freshwater for human
health and the economy.
Despite recent progress in invasion biology, a more
complete understanding of invader impacts and the mechanisms
through which they occur is essential to effective
management and remediation of biological invasions. From
well-studied cases, it is clear that invasions can lead to
broad-scale changes in native populations, community
structure, and ecosystem processes. High-profile examples
in freshwaters include invasions by Nile perch in Lake
Victoria, zebra mussels in North America (Johnson et al.
2006), spiny water fleas in Canada (Yan et al. 2002),
American bullfrogs in the western USA (Hayes and Jennings
1986) and salt cedar (Tamarix spp.) in riparian areas
of the southwest (Stromberg et al. 2007). For most invaders,
however, our knowledge regarding specific ecological
impacts remains limited (Pys?ek et al. 2008), particularly at
scales extending beyond the population level (see Parker
et al. 1999). When community or ecosystem-level changes
are associated with an invasion, the direct and indirect
mechanisms responsible are often unknown or confounded
by other forms of environmental change, precluding identification
of the invaderís role in observed shifts. This
situation may severely undermine our ability to forecast
how future increases or decreases (e.g., through eradication
efforts) in invader abundances are likely to influence ecosystem
conditions (Strayer et al. 2006).
As the number of biological invasions continues to
increase, many ecosystems now support multiple nonindigenous
species; for some environments and taxa,
introduced species now outnumber native species (e.g., San
Francisco Bay, California). Complex interactions among
this ëëcocktailíí of invaders can lead to a diversity of outcomes
for native species and ecosystems, many of which
are difficult to predict a priori (Grosholz et al. 2000;
Crooks 2002; Bruno et al. 2005). Invaders may negatively
affect one another through competition and/or predation,
reducing or minimizing their joint impacts on native biota
(Ross et al. 2004). In other cases, invaders may have no
effect on each other (e.g., Cope and Winterbourn 2004) or
exhibit facilitative interactions, increasing their ecological
impacts and promoting establishment and spread (e.g.,
Ricciardi 2001; OíDowd et al. 2003; Grosholz 2005).
Because of the potentially complex interactions among
invaders, experimental research to identify how invaders
interact and their consequences for native communities and
ecosystems is particularly valuable (e.g., Kiesecker and
Blaustein 1998). Such efforts may be especially insightful
in freshwater environments (see Lodge et al. 1994), where
experimental approaches to understanding the multi-scale
effects of invasive species have historically been underrepresented
(Parker et al. 1999; Adams et al. 2003).
Here we experimentally investigated the individual and
combined effects of two widespread freshwater invaders in
the US, the omnivorous rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus)
and the herbivorous Chinese mystery snail (Bellamya
chinensis), on community and ecosystem properties of a
benthic food web. We used mechanistic experiments to
address the following questions:
1. What are the individual and combined effects of
Chinese mystery snails and rusty crayfish on native
snail growth, survival and reproduction?
2. How do these invasive species affect one another?
3. What are the direct and indirect consequences of these
invaders for algal growth and nutrient availability?
We focused on the response of native snails to invasion
because of their importance in benthic food webs and
because of their potential sensitivity to invasive crayfish
(predators) and snails (competitors) (e.g., Dillon 2000;
Carlsson et al. 2004). The rusty crayfish and the Chinese
mystery snail are both widespread among inland lakes in
the Laurentian Great Lakes region. While the impacts of
rusty crayfish have been the subject of extensive research
in northern temperate lakes (Lodge et al. 1994; Hein et al.
2006; McCarthy et al. 2006), no studies have addressed
ecological effects of Bellamya or the interactions between
these invaders. By examining the joint effects of an invasive
predator and an invasive herbivore on the community
and ecosystem properties of freshwater environments, this
study aims to advance our understanding of multi-invader
interactions. Given the larger size and thicker shell of
Bellamya relative to native freshwater snails, we expected
that it would be resistant to predatory crayfish, creating
potential for multi-invader facilitation.
xmethods
The rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus, hereafter ëëOrconectesíí;
Fig. 1) has expanded its distribution over the last
50 years from its historical range in the Ohio River
drainage to waters throughout at least 18 US states,
Ontario, Quebec, Manitoba and the Laurentian Great Lakes
(Olden et al. 2006). Vectors of rusty crayfish introduction
include bait bucket discharge by recreational anglers,
intentional releases by lake-users for nuisance weed control
and commercial crayfish retailers, and natural inter-lake
dispersal. In Wisconsin, Orconectes captures have
increased from 7% of all crayfish records collected during
the first 20 years of their invasion to 36% of all records during the most recent 20 years (Olden et al. 2006). Orconectes
can have substantial impacts on invaded
freshwater ecosystems by feeding on organisms from
multiple trophic levels, including benthic algae, macrophytes,
invertebrates, snails, native congeners and fish
(e.g., Lodge et al. 1994; McCarthy et al. 2006).
The Chinese mystery snail [Bellamya (=Cipangopaludina)
chinensis, hereafter ëëBellamyaíí] is a very large (up
to 64 mm) viviparid snail native to Asia that was first
observed in North America in the 1890s (Fig. 1; Clench
and Fuller 1965; Jokinen 1982). The taxonomy of this
group is incompletely resolved, and we follow Smith
(2000) in using the genus name Bellamya (rather than the
traditional Cipangopaludina). Bellamya was almost certainly
introduced to the US multiple times through the
aquarium trade or for culinary purposes (Mackie 1999),
and is now widely distributed in lentic and slow-moving
lotic water bodies across North America, including 27 US
states and all of the Great Lakes (Clench and Fuller 1965;
Dundee 1974; Jokinen 1982; Strayer 1987; Bury et al.
2007; http://nas.er.usgs.gov/). In Wisconsin, Bellamya was
first recorded in the 1950s (Teskey 1954). These snails
prefer muddy or sandy substrates, where they feed predominantly
on epiphytic benthic algae, especially diatoms
(Jokinen 1982). While little is known about its ecological
significance or impacts on native fauna and flora, Bellamya
can achieve very high densities in invaded lakes ([40 m-2
,
P. T. J. J., unpublished data; Branson 1977), and were
reportedly removed from Lake Erie by the ton during the
1960s (Mills et al. 1993). Considering their often substantial
biomass and the general importance of snails as
benthic herbivores, we hypothesized that Bellamya would
have ecologically significant effects on invaded communities
and ecosystems (Carlsson et al. 2004; Bury et al.
2007).
Available field data indicate that these two invaders
frequently co-occur. A compilation of unpublished surveys
conducted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (WDNR), the Great Lakes Indian Fish and
Wildlife Commission, and the University of Wisconsinó
Madison includes 550 and 266 water bodies sampled for
Orconectes and Bellamya, respectively. Records were
included only when detection and non-detection data were
available and when invader occurrences were recorded by
trained biologists or through vouchered specimens (see
Johnson et al. 2008 for a complete description of the
database). Among the 242 lakes sampled for both invaders,
Bellamya occurred in 33.5%, Orconectes in 36.4%, and the
invaders co-occurred in 18.2% of lakes (Fig. 1). While
lakes were not sampled randomly (see Johnson et al. 2008),
these data nevertheless suggest that both invaders are
widespread in Wisconsin and that they frequently co-occur.
The larger size and thicker shell of Bellamya relative to
native snails indicate that it is likely more resistant to
crayfish predation, suggesting the co-occurrence of these
invaders may have important impacts on native
communities.We conducted a 2 9 2 experiment manipulating the presence
of Bellamya and Orconectes to evaluate their individual and combined effects on native snail communities,
algal growth and water column nutrient
concentrations (N and P). The experiment was conducted
over an 8-week period in 24 outdoor mesocosms (1,200 l)
randomly assigned to one of the following treatments: (1)
native snails only, (2) native snails with Bellamya, (3)
native snails with Orconectes, and (4) native snails with
both invaders (six replicates per condition). Mesocosms
were made of structural foam plastic and measured
1.6 9 1.7 m with a fill height of 0.5 m. While not equivalent
to ecosystem-level manipulations, mesocosm studies
can provide important insights about mechanistic interactions
in aquatic food webs, including snailñpredator
interactions (e.g., Nystro®m et al. 1999; Turner and Chislock
2007). Prior to initiating the experiment, we seeded each
mesocosm with *1,000 l lake water, 18 kg commercial
ëëplay sandíí and 27 kg coarse (1.9 cm diameter) gravel as
substrate, two cinderblocks as refugia, and 28 g CaCO3 to
ensure sufficient Ca for shell growth. To provide inocula of
algae and zooplankton, we added 150 ml lake mud and
100 ml concentrated zooplankton (dominated by Daphnia
pulicaria) to each mesocosm. We supplemented nutrient
levels by adding 1.40 g NH4NO3 and 0.097 ml of 85%
H3PO4 (initial concentrations of *450 lg l-1 N and
*50 lg l-1 P). Otherwise water chemistry mirrored
Sparkling Lake, Vilas County, Wisconsin during June 2006
(see http://www.limnology.wisc.edu/). Mesocosms were
covered with nylon mesh lids (1 mm mesh size) designed
to permit sunlight while minimizing colonization by
unintended fauna and flora.One week after establishing mesocosms, we added 45
individuals of each of the following native snail species:
Physa gyrina (hereafter ëëPhysaíí, mean shell length ± 1
SE = 7.3 ± 1.5 mm), Helisoma trivolvis (hereafter
ëëHelisomaíí, 12.8 ± 1.0 mm) and Lymnaea stagnalis
(hereafter ëëLymnaeaíí, 25.3 ± 3.7 mm). These species
occur commonly in lakes within the Northern Highlands
Region of Wisconsin (Lewis and Magnuson 2000) and
represent three pulmonate families with varying life history
strategies: Physidae, Planorbidae and Lymnaeidae. For
mesocosms assigned to invader treatments, we added 45
Bellamya (27.2 ± 3.5 mm) and/or two Orconectes
(32.1 ± 0.4 mm carapace length). These densitiesó
approximately 10 snails m-2 and 0.2 crayfish m-2
óare
within the range normally observed in northern Wisconsin
(Lewis and Magnuson 2000; Hein et al. 2006). Independent
subsets of snails (n = 30 per species) and crayfish
(n = 10) were individually measured, dried (60C for
1 week), and weighed (shell and tissue). Because trematode
parasite infections can be common in gastropods, with
significant effects on snail behavior and reproduction (e.g.,
Bernot 2003), we also dissected a subset (n[50) of snails
in each species to ensure the rarity of potentially confounding
infections.During weeks 2 and 7 of the experiment, we measured water
nutrient concentrations (N and P) and periphyton chlorophyll
a levels on the mesocosm walls and on the sediment.
In each mesocosm, water collected from three locations
(using a 1.3-l tube sampler) was pooled, filtered (53 lm),
and analyzed for total N and P using a persulfate digestion
(see http://lter.limnology.wisc.edu/protocols. html).
Periphyton was removed with a razor blade from 5-cm
strips of flagging tape attached to the mesocosm walls (see
Johnson et al. 2007). Sediment periphyton was collected
and pooled from four locations within each mesocosm using
a modified 60-ml syringe to quickly draw up the upper
*2 cm of sediment. Chl-a for mesocosm wall periphyton
and sediment algae was analyzed after methanol extraction
(see http://lter.limnology.wisc.edu/protocols.html). After 8
weeks, we drained the water from each mesocosm and
enumerated snails and crayfish. Snails were weighed
(aggregated wet mass) and individually measured. Crayfish
were measured, dried (60C for 1 week), and weighed.We measured rates of N and P excretion for each snail
species in each treatment condition (except when insuffi-
cient numbers of snails remained alive due to crayfish
predation). We placed a fixed number of snails into darkened,
acid-washed containers with a known volume of
water (Bellamya, four snails in 1.0 l; Helisoma and Lymnaea,
ten snails in 0.2 l; and Physa, 40 snails in 0.1 l). After
1 h, we removed and weighed snails, collected excreted
particles on pre-ashed and weighed glass fiber filters
(1.0 lm pore size), and kept 100 ml filtrate. Filters were
dried (60C) to constant weight and, along with the filtrate,
analyzed for total N and P using the persulfate digestion
method.

We analyzed the effects of Bellamya, Orconectes and their
interactions on the final abundance and wet mass of each
native snail species using multivariate ANOVA (MANOVA)
(log10-transformed ? 1 values; Quinn and Keough
2002). When evaluating the combined effects of two or
more species, it is important to consider whether their
effects should be strictly independent (i.e., the joint effects
of both species on some response variable is simply the sum of their individual effects when isolated) or may
instead be non-independent (greater or less than the sum of
their individual effects) (e.g., Wootton 1994; Sih et al.
1998). We evaluated whether effects of the two invasive
species were independent using a two-way factorial
ANOVA after log10-transforming snail densities (see
Wootton 1994; Vonesh and Osenberg 2003; Fournier et al.
2006). We interpret a significant interaction term as indicating
that the effect of the two invaders is nonindependent.
Although the addition of a constant (e.g., ?1)
to deal with zero values prior to log-transformation can
alter this underlying biological relationship, this change is
proportionately small (for our data) and unlikely to affect
the results.
The effects of each invader on periphyton chlorophyll a
levels (sediment and mesocosm walls), the N:P ratio in the
water column, and on one another (size and/or abundance
of the co-occurring invader) were evaluated using repeated-measures
(RM) MANOVA. This analysis explicitly
compared the value of each response variable between
weeks 2 and 7 and among treatments. Finally, because the
two invaders were stocked at different initial densities and
biomasses, comparison of their effects on native species
required calculation of an adjusted impact value (see Parker
et al. 1999), in which the effects of each invader were
converted to a per capita estimate as follows:
Iij º DNij  DNiﬁ
Bj
where Iij is the impact of invasive species j on the abundance
of native species i, DNij is the average change in
native species i abundance in treatments with invader j,
DNi is the average change in native species i abundance or
biomass in the absence of either invader, and Bj is the
average abundance of invader j during the experiment. In
this manner, we examined the impact of each invader relative
to the change in native snail abundance in the absence
of the invaders.

xresults
Results of the mesocosm experiment indicated that both
invaders negatively affected native snail abundance
(Fig. 2a; MANOVA, Bellamya, Wilksí k = 0.56,
F3,18 = 4.80, P = 0.013; Orconectes, Wilksí k = 0.09,
F3,18 = 64.72, P\0.0001). Bellamya negatively influenced
the abundance of Lymnaea (ANOVA, F1,20 = 14.32,
P = 0.001), whereas Orconectes strongly reduced the
abundance of both Lymnaea and Physa (ANOVA, Lymnaea,
F1,20 = 173.4, P\0.0001; Physa, F1,20 = 35.56,
P\0.0001). Physa abundance increased by 110% in the
absence of invaders, increased by 17% with Bellamya only,
and declined by [60% when Orconectes was present
(alone or with Bellamya) (Fig. 2a). We also found a significant
Orconectes-by-Bellamya interaction on Lymnaea
abundance (ANOVA, F1,20 = 5.28, P = 0.03). Lymnaea
abundance remained steady in the native treatment, but
declined by 32% with Bellamya, and by 90% with Orconectes;
Lymnaea went extinct in the combined invader
treatment (Fig. 2a). Based on a model of independent
enemy effects (e.g., Wootton 1994; Sih et al. 1998; Vonesh
and Osenberg 2003), the expected decrease in the presence
of both invaders was approximately 67% (i.e., less than the
observed 100% reduction), suggesting that the presence of
both invaders led to risk enhancement. Neither invader
significantly affected the abundance of Helisoma, which
declined sharply regardless of treatment condition. While
both invaders affected the three native species similarly,
the per capita effects of predatory crayfish (n = 2 per
mesocosm) were consistently greater than those of Bellamya
(n = 45 per mesocosm) (Fig. 3).
Bellamya and Orconectes had similarly negative effects
on the final wet mass of native snail species (Fig. 2b;
MANOVA, Bellamya, Wilksí k = 0.17, F3,18 = 28.69,
P\0.0001; Orconectes, Wilksí k = 0.003, F3,18 =
1,845.02, P\0.0001). In the absence of either invader,
Lymnaea mass increased by 91%; however, it decreased by
7% with Bellamya and by[85% with Orconectes (alone or
with Bellamya) (Bellamya on Lymnaea, F1,20 = 56.33,
P\0.0001; Orconectes on Lymnaea, F1,20 = 3867.2,
P\0.0001). Similarly, Physa mass increased by 20%
in the native snail treatment, decreased by 24% with
Bellamya, and decreased by[95% with Orconectes (alone
or with Bellamya) (Bellamya on Physa, F1,20 = 6.66,
P = 0.018; Orconectes on Physa, F1,20 = 395.28,
P\0.0001). The observed declines in Lymnaea mass
associated with Bellamya were due to changes in both
survival and growth, as the log10-transformed mean sizes of
Lymnaea (but not of Physa or Helisoma) from Bellamya
treatments were smaller than in the native treatments
(MANOVA, Wilksí k = 0.102, F3,8 = 23.56, P\0.0001;
ANOVA on Lymnaea, F1,10 = 35.07, P\0.0001). Too
few native snails remained in the Orconectes treatments to
evaluate the effect of crayfish on snail growth. Neither
invader significantly influenced changes in the wet mass of
Helisoma, which declined in all treatments.
We found a significant interactive effect of Bellamya
and Orconectes presence on Lymnaea biomass (Bellamya
9 Orconectes, F1,20 = 34.29, P\0.0001), such that
the effect of each invader was strongest in the absence of
the other. However, this effect likely resulted from the fact
that crayfish presence alone strongly ([95%) reduced
Lymnaea biomass, and the added effects of Bellamya were
therefore minimal, even though Lymnaea went extinct
when both invaders were present. The combination of both
invaders could not drive biomass below zero.
Bellamya and Orconectes had negative or neutral effects
upon each other. Orconectes caused a decline in Bellamya
abundance but not in wet mass (Fig. 4; MANOVA, Orconectes
on Bellamya, Wilksí k = 0.110, F2,9 = 36.36,
P\0.0001; wet mass, F1,10 = 0.97, P = 0.349; abundance,
F1,10 = 69.29, P\0.0001). Overall, this result
owed to the reduced abundance of small, juvenile Bellamya
in the presence of Orconectes, likely as a result of either
predation or lower reproductive output. For Orconectes, all
crayfish survived for the duration of the experiment, and
the presence of Bellamya had no significant effects on
either the final size or mass of crayfish (averaged between
individuals within the same mesocosm) (Fig. 4; ANOVA,
P[0.05).
Effects of invaders on chlorophyll a and nutrient
concentrations
Both invaders significantly influenced algal growth within
the mesocosms but in opposing directions (RM-MANOVA,
Bellamya, Wilksí k = 0.325, F3,18 = 12.49, P\0.0001;
Orconectes, Wilksí k = 0.269, F3,18 = 16.32, P\0.0001).
Bellamya caused a decrease in sediment periphyton and a
marginally significant decrease in wall periphyton (ANOVA, sediment, F1,20 = 9.531, P = 0.006; wall
periphyton, F1,20 = 3.237, P = 0.087), whereas Orconectes
presence substantially increased periphyton chlorophyll a
(Fig. 5a, b; ANOVA, F1,20 = 19.47, P\0.0001). We also
observed a time-by-Bellamya-by-Orconectes interaction on
periphyton chlorophyll a (ANOVA, F1,20 = 5.07,
P = 0.036), such that Bellamya reduced wall periphyton
only in the absence of Orconectes (Fig. 5a). Bellamya also
caused significant increases in the molar ratio of N to P in the
water column, whereas Orconectes had no detectable effects
on nutrient concentrations (Fig. 5c; MANOVA, time 9
Bellamya, Wilksí k = 0.750, F3,18 = 6.672, P = 0.018).
Results of the snail excretion trials suggest that this effect
may be due to a low rate of P excretion by Bellamya relative
to native snails (Fig. 5d). Thus, the high biomass of Bellamya
in combination with their low P excretion rates may
reduce the amount of biologically available P and increase
the N:P ratio
xdiscussion
Many ecosystems now support multiple invasive species,
and some have been invaded by hundreds of non-native
plants, animals, and micro-organisms (e.g., Ruiz et al. 2000;
Ricciardi 2001; OíDowd et al. 2003; Grosholz 2005). Past
studies of species introductions largely emphasized invader
impacts on particular taxa, focusing on conspicuous species
or species that cause dramatic ecological impacts (Parker
et al. 1999; Grosholz et al. 2000; Pys?ek et al. 2008). As a
result, we know comparatively little about how the effects
of individual invaders may be attenuated or amplified as a
result of interactions with other invaders, making the net
consequences of biological invasions difficult to predict
(Bruno et al. 2005). Field-based efforts need to be supplemented
with experiments that examine the individual and
combined effects of multiple invaders at several ecological
scales, ranging from individuals to ecosystems (Ricciardi
2003; Strayer et al. 2006).
Results of our experiment demonstrate that, within
experimental mesocosms, realistic densities of Bellamya
and Orconectes each have significant effects on native snail
communities and ecosystem properties. Relative to control
treatments, rusty crayfish reduced the biomass of native
Lymnaea and Physa snails by [90%, consistent with previous
field studies illustrating the predatory effects of
invasive crayfish (Lodge et al. 1994; McCarthy et al. 2006).Competition by herbivorous Chinese mystery snails also
caused substantial declines in the growth and abundance of
native snails (Fig. 2). Despite this speciesí long invasion
history, broad distribution within North America, and often
high biomass within invaded environments, we are not
aware of any previous study that has examined its ecological
impacts.
We found evidence that the dual effects of both invaders
on native snails were as severe as or worse than were their
individual effects. Importantly, Bellamya and Orconectes
had only weakly negative effects upon each other. With its
large size and thick shell, Bellamya was substantially less
vulnerable to crayfish predation than were Physa and
Lymnaea (see also Osenberg and Mittelbach 1989; Brown
1998). As a result, the combination of both invaders had
sharply negative effects on these native snails. The presence
of both invaders led to risk enhancement for Lymnaea,
such that Lymnaea was completely extirpated from all
replicates in which Orconectes and Bellamya co-occurred
but persisted (albeit at lower densities) when faced with
either invader in isolation. Similarly, the biomass of Physa
declined by[98% when confronted with both invaders. In
contrast, Bellamya abundance declined by less than 15% in
the presence of Orconectes, and biomass showed little
change (\3%). With respect to Lymnaea and Physa biomasses,
however, the combined presence of Bellamya and
Orconectes led to risk reduction. This can likely be
attributed to two factors. First, Bellamya negatively affected
native snails indirectly through competition for
resources; the presence of predatory crayfish, however,
sharply reduced native snail density, thereby lessening the
strength of competition between native and invasive snails
and thus the effect of Bellamya. Second, because Orconectes
often reduced native snail biomass by[90%, it was
impossible for Bellamya to additionally drive this biomass
below zero. We emphasize that a more complete understanding
of the biological interactions between Bellayma
and Orconectes could be achieved using a larger experimental
scales (e.g., in situ experiments).
Overall, these results may help to explain why Bellamya
and Orconectes frequently co-occur among Wisconsin
lakes. This pattern likely reflects that both species are
invading similar types of environments and/or the conditions
created by one species may be conducive to
establishment of the second invader. Lakes in our study
region are subjected to increased human activity and disturbance,
which likely lead to greater propagule pressure
and enhanced probability of establishment success for both
species (Havel et al. 2005; Johnson et al. 2008). However,
because rusty crayfish reduce native snail abundance
(Lodge et al. 1994; McCarthy et al. 2006; this study) with
only limited effects on Bellamya, crayfish invasions could
also indirectly facilitate the subsequent establishment and
spread of Bellamya by weakening competition for algal
resources. In a similar example, the non-native amethyst
gem clam (Gemma gemma) expanded its range in San
Francisco Bay only after the invasion of European green
crab (Carcinus maenas), which preferentially consumes
native clams (Grosholz 2005). However, because rusty
crayfish also had weakly negative effects on Bellamya,
particularly with respect to production of new snails, the
net benefit conferred by such predator-mediated competition
is not resolved.
Although predatory rusty crayfish had substantially
greater per capita effects on native species than did Bellamya
(a competitor), both invaders affected the three
native snail species in a similar fashion, with the strongest
effects on Physa, followed by Lymnaea, then Helisoma.
Neither invader, however, significantly affected the density
or biomass of Helisoma, which declined sharply in all
treatments (including the control). These patterns may
result from ecological trade-offs between predation resistance
and resource competition. Physa and Lymnaea have
thin shells that offer little protection against crayfish
(Brown 1998; Nystro®m and Perez 1998; Nystro®m et al.
1999; Rundle and Bro®nmark 2001), but are more adapted to
rapidly convert available resources into growth and
reproduction. Both species increased significantly in either
abundance (Physa) or growth (Lymnaea) in the control
treatment, but declined in the presence of either invader. In
contrast, the thick shell of Helisoma affords greater protection
from crayfish and fish predators (Stein et al. 1984;
Osenberg and Mittelbach 1989; Brown 1998; Rundle and
Bro®nmark 2001); competition with the other native snails
for algal resources may have prevented this species from
increasing significantly, even in the absence of either
invader. However, this does not explain why Helisoma
failed to increase in abundance or biomass in the presence
of crayfish, which reduced the abundance of other native
snails.
Our experimental results underscore the importance of
individual and interactive effects of invasive species on
community and ecosystem properties. Orconectes substantially
increased the amount of periphyton, most likely as an
indirect result of a trophic cascade: crayfish predation
reduced the abundance of grazing native snails, thereby
increasing the amount of periphyton in the system. Similar
results from crayfish predation have been reported by Nystro®m
et al. (1999, 2001). Grazing by Bellamya, in contrast,
negatively affected periphyton levels on the mesocosm
walls and especially the sediment, where Bellamya were
most commonly observed during the experiment. Bellamya
also increased the ratio of total N to P in the water column,
which can have important effects on algal community
structure in natural systems. We suggest this intriguing
finding may be explained, in part, by results of the snail excretion trials. Per unit dry mass, Bellamya excreted less P
in dissolved or particulate form than any of the three native
snail species, suggesting that the tissues of this invader
might represent a ëësinkíí for P, reducing its availability in
the environment and thereby increasing the N:P ratio.
Similarly, Evans-White and Lamberti (2006) reported that
consumer identity could influence nutrient recycling, likely
via differences in excretion patterns. Given the importance
of N:P in ecological stochiometry and in controlling algal
growth, additional experimental and field efforts are needed
to clarify and substantiate this finding and evaluate its
significance. Carlsson et al. (2004) found that introduced
apple snails in Southeast Asia can drive wetlands from a
macrophyte-dominated, clear water state to a turbid,
phytoplankton-dominated state with concomitant shifts in
the biological community, highlighting the potential significance
of invasive snails on ecosystem condition.
Our findings highlight the potential importance of
interactions between Bellamya and Orconectes in affecting
native snail communities. As found in several previous
studies, predation by invasive crayfish sharply reduced
native snail biomass (Lodge et al. 1994; Nystro®m et al.
1999, 2001); by virtue of its large size and thick shell,
however, Bellamya was relatively unaffected by Orconectes,
but did have significant competitive consequences
for two of the three native snail groups. How results from
these experimental systems scale up to entire lake ecosystems
is an important but as of yet unanswered question.
Given that these experimental communities included only a
subset of the possible native benthic species and single
initial density of each invader, we fully expect that the
patterns observed here will vary both within and among
larger lake ecosystems. Broad-scale field surveys, preferably
in combination with in situ experiments, represent an
important next step in definitively assessing the effects of
each invader and their interactions in nature.
Quantifying the impact of biological invasions is a
complex and challenging endeavor (Strayer et al. 2006).
Our findings highlight the importance of quantifying the
direct and indirect interactions among invasive species.
The need for ecologists to address such questions is
underscored by the now commonplace occurrence of
multiple invaders within many ecosystems. Identifying the
multi-trophic impacts of biological invasions is a particularly
pressing issue in freshwater ecosystems, which have
endured widespread invasions by non-indigenous species
and exhibit high levels of species imperilment and
extinction risk.