xabstract
In aquatic ecosystems, impacts by invasive introduced fish can be likened to
press disturbances that persistently influence communities. This study examined invasion
disturbances by determining the relationship between non-native sharptooth catfish Clarias
gariepinus and aquatic macroinvertebrates in the Eastern Cape, South Africa. A Multiple
BeforeñAfter ControlñImpact (MBACI) experimental design was used to examine macroinvertebrate
communities within two rivers: one with catfish and another one without catfish.
Within the invaded river, macroinvertebrates showed little response to catfish presence,
whereas predator exclusion appeared to benefit community structure. This suggests that the
macroinvertebrate community within the invaded river was adapted to predation impact
because of the dominance of resilient taxa, such as Hirudinea, Oligochaeta and Chironomidae
that were abundant in the Impact treatment relative to the Control treatment. High
macroinvertebrate diversity and richness that was observed in the Control treatment, which
excluded the predator, relative to the Impact treatment suggests predator avoidance
behaviour within the invaded river. By comparison, within the uninvaded river, catfish
introduction into the Impact treatment plots indicated negative effects on macroinvertebrate
community that was reflected by decrease in diversity, richness and biomass. A communitylevel
impact was also reflected in the multivariate analysis that indicated more variation in
macroinvertebrate composition within the Impact treatment relative to the Control in the
uninvaded river. Catfish impact within the uninvaded river suggests the dominance of vulnerable
taxa, such as odonates that were less abundant in the Impact treatment plots after
catfish introduction. From a disturbance perspective, this study revealed different macroinvertebrate
responses to catfish impact, and suggests that within invaded habitats, macroinvertebrates
were less responsive to catfish presence, whereas catfish introduction within
uninvaded habitats demonstrated invasion impact that was shown by a decrease in the
abundance of vulnerable taxa. The occurrence of non-native sharptooth catfish within many
Eastern Cape rivers is a concern because of its predation impact and potential to influence
xintroduction
The response of biological communities to impacts can be categorised as either pulse
disturbance, which indicates short-term and often unpredictable changes, press disturbance,
which shows long-term changes that increase initially before reaching constant
levels, or ramp disturbance that represent accumulation of impacts over time (Underwood
1991, 1992; Lake 2000; Parkyn and Collier 2004; Harper and Peckarsky 2005). In aquatic
ecosystems, disturbances from biological invasions are widely recognised as determinants
of community patterns and threats to biodiversity (Johnson et al. 2009). Detecting these
invasive impacts can unfortunately be confounded by other forms of environmental change
that preclude the identification of the invaderís role (Underwood 1994, 1997). In particular,
stochastic variability in animal abundance over long temporal scales and their lack of
concordance at different localities often result in interactions in trends of abundance over
space and time (Grossman et al. 1990; Beugly and Pyron 2010). The underlying principle
within an impact study is to be able to distinguish between these natural and stochastic
changes from the perceived impact.
Benthic aquatic macroinvertebrates are widely used as indicators in environmental
impact studies. Their ubiquity and differential response to different categories of disturbances
makes them excellent candidates (Rosenberg and Resh 1993). In predation impact
studies, especially by non-native invasive fish, aquatic macroinvertebrates are highly
susceptible and can exhibit responses ranging from simple interactions such as reduction or
local extinction of populations, to complex interactions such as trophic cascading (Flecker
and Townsend 1994; Nystro®m and McIntosh 2003; Williams and Taylor 2003). Experimental
studies indicate that when invasive predators become established, they tend to
remove the most vulnerable macroinvertebrate taxa, and the resultant community either
shows little response to predation-related disturbances (Meissner and Moutka 2006), or it
becomes highly unstable and stochastic (Angeler and Moreno 2007). Community instabilities
in predator-mediated communities are a consequence of a transition to a new
alternative stable state during both the disturbance and post-disturbance periods (Suding
et al. 2004). Such communities are often dominated by macroinvertebrate taxa that can
either seek alternative refuge and quickly recolonise from adjacent habitats (Miller and
Crowl 2006), or are not preferred by the predator (Meissner and Moutka 2006; Effenberger
et al. 2008). Therefore, the presence of invasive non-native predators can be likened to
press disturbances that persistently influence community structure and function. Press
disturbances represent environmental perturbations caused by a sustained impact that
continuously disrupts community structure and composition (Underwood 1992; Lake
2000; Parkyn and Collier 2004).
Greenís (1979) BACI (BeforeñAfter ControlñImpact) experimental approach has been
widely used in impact studies. This experimental design is based on the basic principle of
collecting samples Before and After the perceived impact at both Control and Impact
locations, and was designed to draw inference on ecological impacts based on field
experiments. The BACI rubric has been modified at various levels to address concerns related to experimental design, such as pseudo-replication (Hurlbert 1984) and the confounding
effects of spatial and temporal variation (Stewart-Oaten et al. 1986; Underwood
1994; Keough and Mapstone 1997; Stewart-Oaten and Bence 2001). Although BACI
designs are important in many habitat impact-based studies, they are rarely used in predation
impact studies. This study used the BACI design to examine the impact of invasive
non-native African sharptooth catfish Clarias gariepinus on patterns of benthic macroinvertebrate
communities in the Eastern Cape Province, South Africa. The catfish was first
introduced in 1976 into the Great Fish River through an 82.8 km tunnel of the Orange
RiverñFish River inter-basin water transfer (IBWT) scheme from its native range in the
Orange River (Cambray and Jubb 1977; Laurenson and Hocutt 1986). The catfish has since
expanded its distribution range and now occurs in many rivers and dams throughout the
region. Due to its possession of an arborescent organ, the catfish has remarkable capabilities
to live in a wide range of habitats including rivers, swamps, natural lakes and manmade
reservoirs (Teugels 1986; De Graaf and Janssen 1996) and adapts easily to new
environments (Bruton 1988). The catfish is a highly mobile omnivorous predator that feeds
on a wide range of prey, including fish, macroinvertebrates, plant material, plankton,
reptiles, and amphibians (Bruton 1979; Merron 1993; Winemiller and Kelso-Winemiller
1996; Yalc∏in et al. 2001). Several studies indicate that in addition to its aggressive predatory
behaviour, the catfish is highly competitive and has the ability to alter food webs and
poses a threat to native biota in areas outside its native range (Lal et al. 2003; Khan and
Panikkar 2009). In the Eastern Cape, South Africa, there is concern over the dispersion of
the catfish into rivers with endemic native fish and macroinvertebrates, which have disappeared
at most localities where the catfish has established (de Moor and Bruton 1988).
The importance of IBWT schemes for facilitating its invasion have been noted, with
dietary studies indicating that it poses a potential negative impact on aquatic macroinvertebrates
(Kadye and Booth 2012).
This study describes a comparison of benthic macroinvertebrate community response
using short-term enclosure/exclosure experiments between two rivers: one with a high
catfish density and another one without catfish. By comparing community responses in
ecosystems with and without catfish, this study provides insights into detecting impacts
from an invader. By excluding catfish, macroinvertebrates communities should be subjected
to minimum predation disturbance and therefore reveal responses to short-term
temporal change to other environmental factors. Within the enclosure/exclosures, the
macroinvertebrate communities should reveal more variation when catfish are present.
xmethods
The study was conducted in the Koonap River and Brak River, two tributaries of the Great
Fish River. These tributaries were selected because they were variably impacted by catfish.
The Koonap River had high ambient densities of the catfish that co-occurred with other fish
species that include longfin eel (Anguilla mossambica), moggel (Labeo umbratus) and
smallmouth yellowfish (Labeobarbus aeneus), whereas the Brak River has no catfish. The
two rivers are in the same ecological region, and the experimental localities were within a
radius of 20 km. The climate of the region is warm-temperate with mean annual precipitation
ranging from 350 to 600 mm, falling mostly in late summer (March to May) and
late winter (August). The stream bed within both rivers predominantly consisted of pebbles (2ñ10 cm) and boulder (10ñ30 cm) substrates interspersed with fine silt. The geology of
the area comprises of a variety of sedimentary strata including marine shales, sandstones,
mudstones and a complex of dolerite dykes and sills (OíKeeffe and de Moor 1988). The
vegetation of the region is characterised by Acacia thornbush and xeric thicket and was
generally undisturbed around the sampling localities. The major land use is grazing pasture
for sheep along the Koonap River and game along the Brak River. River flow is intermittent
and occurs when there are floods, usually in summer. As flow ceases, the aquatic
habitats become a series of isolated pools that are usually maintained by base flow. The
Koonap River was sampled near its confluence with the Great Fish River, whereas the Brak
River was sampled within its headwaters beyond the migration limits of the catfish from
the Glen Melville Reservoir. The experimental section in the Brak River was a headwater
stretch that periodically receives highly mineralised water from the Great Fish Riverís
tertiary IBWT. Mean water temperature within the Koonap and Brak Rivers over the study
period was 14.5 ± 1.4 C and 16.5 ± 0.8 C, respectively. Conductivity was high in the
Brak River, with an average of 1290 ± 46 lS cm-1 compared to the Koonap River that
had an average of 552 ± 30 lS cm-1
. The pH was less variable and ranged from 7.8 to 8.5
and 8.2 to 8.4 within the Koonap River and Brak River, respectively. Temperature (C),
pH, and conductivity (lS cm-1
) were measured during each sampling occasion with a
HANNA HI 98129 Combo meter. Both rivers had no flow during the study.A pilot study was initially conducted over a period of 6 weeks between July and August
2009 to determine the rate of macroinvertebrate colonisation on different type of artificial
substrates. The substrate types used were gravel, pebbles, shredded (2 mm) polythene
plastic strips, and a mix of pebbles and polythene plastic strips. Cumulative asymptotes for
macroinvertebrate diversity and richness were observed between 3 and 4 weeks. The
pebble and polythene strips mixed substrate, which provided a better measure of diversity
and richness, was then used in the impact experiment. Each artificial substrate unit consisted
of a 4 mm polythene netting container measuring 10 cm 9 10 cm 9 3 cm in
length, width and height, respectively. The artificial substrates were placed within exclusion
cages that each measured 1 m 9 1 m 9 0.5 m in length, width and height, respectively,
and were constructed of 4 mm diameter polythene netting. Each cage had 18
artificial substrates. Access by larger macroinvertebrates was facilitated by punching 30
additional holes, each measuring between 1 and 2 cm, into each side and bottom of the
cage.
In each of the rivers, fish exclosure cages with artificial benthic invertebrate substrates
were used to test the treatment effects of the introduction of catfish. The cages, which were
placed in different locations within each of the two rivers, were designed to simulate
minimum predation disturbances for the macroinvertebrates before the impact was
assessed. The treatments for the cages were Control (catfish exclusion) and Impact
(introduction of the catfish) tested Before and After the impact on multiple locations within
each river (MBACI design).
Sampling for the impact experiment was conducted between July and October 2010. A
multifactorial experimental design was used in this study. Eight exclusion cages (four were
randomly assigned as Controls and four as Impacts) were placed into each of the two rivers
for a period of 4 weeks prior to the start of the catfish impact experiment to allow for
macroinvertebrate colonisation. The cages were placed at a depth between 0.5 and 0.75 m
with homogenous cobble and fine silt substrates. Individual cages were placed in different isolated pools within each river. In one large isolated pool within the Koonap River, cages
were placed 100 m apart at two sites on either ends of the pool. Treatments (Control and
Impact) were randomly assigned to the different sites (cages). After the end of the colonisation
period, each river was sampled weekly for 3 weeks by collecting three artificial
substrates from each cage to give a total of 24 samples (8 cages 9 3 artificial substrates)
during each sampling occasion. This was the Before period. After the 3rd week, two catfish
(each measuring between 20 and 40 cm) were introduced into each of the four Impact
exclusion cages in each river. Sampling after the introduction of the catfish as an Impact
was done weekly for another 3 weeks and was the After period. The two catfish per cage
corresponded to the average catch per unit effort (CPUE), using gill nets and fyke nets, in
the experimental localities during routine sampling within the Koonap River. There was no
catfish mortality nor involuntary introduction by other fish species into the exclusion cages
during the After period.
At the end of each of the six sampling events, the macroinvertebrates on each of the
artificial substrates were visually sorted, identified to family level under a dissection
microscope (magnification 910), counted and weighed for dry mass (overnight at 60C) in
the laboratory. Each artificial substrate was analysed alive to reduce bias associated with
moribund macroinvertebrates and took approximately 30 min to complete. The data from
the three artificial substrates samples per treatment cage per sampling period were averaged
prior to the analysis. Macroinvertebrate diversity, taxa richness, dry mass and abundance were determined for
each treatment sample. Diversity was calculated using the ShannonñWienerís index given
as H0 º Ps
iº1 pi ln pi, where pi is the proportional abundance of taxa i in the sample
given s taxa. Taxa richness was presented as number of invertebrate taxa per 10 cm2
, while
dry mass and abundance were expressed as mg per 10 cm2 and number per 10 cm2
,
respectively.
Dry mass and abundance (counts) data were ln(x ? 1) transformed to satisfy the
requirements of normally-distributed residuals and homoscedasticity. The MBACI analyses
contrasted temporal patterns of taxa mean diversity, mean richness, mean ln(dry
mass), mean ln(abundance) for both total and selected individual (most abundant) macroinvertebrate
taxa at both the Control and Impact sites. The main interaction of interest in
an MBACI experimental design for detecting an environmental impact is the interaction
between the ControlñImpact treatments and BeforeñAfter times (Downes et al. 2002;
Quinn and Keough 2002). For each river, a linear mixed-effects model was used and
expressed as:
yijkl º CI  BAij ˛ L CI  ﬁk ˛ T BA  ﬁl ˛ eijkl
where the fixed effects were the ControlñImpact treatments (CIó2 levels) and periods
BeforeñAfter the introduction of the impact (BAó2 levels). Random effects were Locations
that were nested within CI (L CI  ﬁó8 levels), and Times nested within BA (T BA  ﬁó6
levels).
The null hypothesised contrast, for each river, between ControlñImpact sites and
BeforeñAfter times (CI  BA), H0 : lCA  lCB  ﬁ lIA  lIB  ﬁº 0, was assumed to be
approximately standard-normally (z) distributed such that z º  ﬁ 1;1;1;1 b ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
 ﬁ 1;1;1;1 R ﬁ 1;1;1;1
p 0
, where
R is the varianceñcovariance matrix of the parameter vector b º lCA; lCB; lIA; lIB  ﬁ0
.
Biodi The analyses were conducted using the library lme4 in R (R Core Development Team
2011).The macroinvertebrate counts for each family from the data produced a species matrix with
23 taxa 9 48 averaged samples for each river and were ln(x ? 1) transformed prior to the
analysis. Patterns of invertebrate abundance were analysed using redundancy analysis
(RDA). RDA is a direct gradient analysis extension of principal components analysis
(PCA). Similar to PCA, RDA identifies orthogonal axes that maximally ëëexplainíí variation
in species composition (Legendre and Legendre 1998) but unlike PCA the axes are
constrained to be linear combinations of explanatory variables. The eigenvalue associated
with each axis is a measure of this variation. Thus, RDA can be considered to be a form of
multivariate regression (Jongman et al. 1995).
As the data were in the form of repeated measurements, a series of ordinations were
conducted to test terms analogous to univariate repeated-measures ANOVA. A split-plot
design, with a permutation scheme adjusted to suit the repeated-measures design of the
data, was used for the analysis. Whole plots were records of each location repeated in time.
Explanatory variables were the same as the fixed- and random-effects in the MBACI
analysis. The interaction of treatment (Control and Impact) and time over sampling period
were of interest in assessing possible impacts.
To test hypotheses related to the impact effects, various combinations of variables,
covariates and their interactions were used with an appropriate Monte Carlo permutation in
the ordination analyses. In the first ordination, variables coding for sampling time and its
interaction with treatments were used as explanatory variables, and sampling locations as
covariates. This ordination explained variation in macroinvertebrate community attributed
to sampling time and treatments occurring through the experiment. In the second ordination,
variables coding for interactions between treatments and sampling time were used
to explain variation attributed to changes due to the experimental treatment effect. In this
analysis, variables coding for locations and time were used as covariates thereby removing
the main treatment effects of the experiment. The third ordination was used to explain
variation attributed to change in the control treatment after removing the impact treatment
effects. The fourth ordination was used to explain variation attributed change in the impact
treatment after removing the control treatment effects. The relationship between individual
macroinvertebrate taxa and the treatment effects was further explored using a Generalised
Linear Modelling procedure. Ordination analyses were conducted in CANOCO v4.5.

xresults
Twenty-three macroinvertebrate taxa belonging to 11 taxonomic groups were sampled
during the experiment (Table 1). Odonata was the most represented group with six families.
Fourteen taxa were collected in the Koonap River that had high ambient densities of
catfish compared to 22 taxa that were collected in the Brak River that had no catfish.
Within the Koonap River, leeches (Hirudinea) were the most abundant taxa with a total
count of 4205. In comparison, within the Brak River, aquatic Oligochaeta earthworms were
the most abundant with a total count of 2772.Within the Koonap River, macroinvertebrate mean diversity and richness were high in the
Control treatment relative to the Impact treatment (Fig. 1). This implied that the exclusion
of the impact disturbance increased community structure within catfish-invaded localities.
The linear mixed-effects model showed that the interactions between treatment and
sampling period were significant for both diversity (P\ 0.05) and taxa richness
(P = 0.02) in this river (Table 2). In contrast, mean dry mass and abundance did not vary
between treatments, and there were no significant interactions between treatment and
sampling period (P[0.05). This indicates that there was no detectable impact on biomass
and abundance within the invaded river. By comparison, within the uninvaded Brak River,
the Impact treatment showed a decrease in macroinvertebrate diversity, richness and dry
mass following the introduction of the catfish (Fig. 1). The linear mixed-effects model
showed significant interactions for the contrasts of these parameters (P\0.05) (Table 2),
indicating that catfish had an impact on community structure and biomass of the macroinvertebrate
assemblage within the uninvaded river. Nonetheless, macroinvertebrate
abundance did not vary between treatments in the Brak River.impact on these taxa (Table 2). These taxa were more abundant in the Control than in the
Impact treatments (Fig. 2). By comparison, the Hirudinea, Chironomidae and Oligochaeta
were more abundant in the Impact than Control treatments, but did not exhibit significant
interaction contrasts indicating that these taxa were not negatively influenced by the catfish
impact within the invaded Koonap River. Within the uninvaded Brak River, the odonate
taxa Coenagrionidae and Libellulidae, which were more abundant within the Control than
the Impact treatments (Fig. 2), exhibited significant interaction contrasts that inferred
catfish impacts (Table 2). By comparison, only the Chironomidae midges were more abundant in the Impact than the Control treatments, with a significant interaction contrast
(P\ 0.01) indicating a positive catfish impact within the uninvaded river. While oligochaete
earthworms increased in abundance between the sampling periods they did not
exhibit any significant differences (P = 0.87) between treatments.From a multivariate perspective, the macroinvertebrate communities underwent significant
(P\ 0.01) directional changes associated with the sampling time and its interaction with
treatment effects in the Brak River, whereas non-significant changes were noted in the
Koonap River (Table 3). These effects explained 21% and 32% of the macroinvertebrate
community variation in the Koonap and Brak Rivers, respectively. In the Koonap River,
when sampling time was partialled out, the interactive terms of the treatment effects, which
explained the variance due to treatment effects that occurred during the experiment,
accounted for 9% of the variation. When considered separately, Control treatment effects
explained 12% whereas Impact treatments explained 10%, indicating that there was slightly
more variation in macroinvertebrate composition within the Control than the Impact treatments.
The taxa biplot for the Koonap River showed that the changes in Belastomatidae and
Baetidae were most closely associated with the Control treatment (Fig. 3). In contrast, the Impact treatment indicated strong association with the leeches, Hirudinea, whereas the
Chironomidae and Oligochaeta increased over time but appeared to be uninfluenced by either
treatment. By comparison, within the Brak River, the interaction terms of the treatment
effects were highly significant (P\0.001) and explained 13% of the variation, indicating a
directional change in time and treatment effects for macroinvertebrate composition. When
considered separately, both treatment interactions were highly significant (P\0.001), with
Control treatment effects explaining 11%, whereas Impact treatments effects explained 23%
(Table 3). This indicated that the macroinvertebrate communities were more variable in the
Impact than the Control treatments in this river. The biplot for the Brak River indicated that
changes in most taxa, which include the odonate taxa, Coenagrionidae, Lestidae and
Libellulidae, were closely associated with the Control treatment (Fig. 3). The Impact
treatment, by contrast, was strongly associated with the Chironomidae, whereas the Oligochaeta
appeared uninfluenced by either treatment.
Generalised Linear Modelling illustrated that, within the Koonap River, Baetidae,
Belostomatidae, Chironomidae, Hirudinea and Hydridae underwent significant (P\0.05)
directional changes associated with the treatment effects (Fig. 4). Baetidae, Belostomatidae
and Hydridae increased in abundance in the Control compared to the Impact treatment
whereas Chironomidae and Hirudinae appeared unaffected as they increased in both
treatments. By comparison, within the Brak River, eight taxa (Ancylidae, Belostomatidae,
Caenidae, Chironomidae, Coenagrionidae, Libellulidae, Oligochaeta and Planaria)
underwent significant (P\0.05) directional change associated with the treatment effects
(Fig. 4). All taxa, except the Chironomidae and Oligochaeta, increased in abundance
within the Control compared to the Impact treatment. The Chironomidae increased in the
Impact treatment while the Oligochaeta were unaffected and increased in both treatments.
xdiscussion
Comparisons of macroinvertebrate communities between catfish invaded and uninvaded
streams revealed contrasting temporal patterns. Within the invaded Koonap River, high macroinvertebrate diversity and richness were observed in the Control treatment that
excluded catfish relative to the Impact treatment that had catfish where macroinvertebrate
community structure varied less between sampling periods. This demonstrated that, within
invaded habitats, excluding the non-native catfish increased community structure, whereas
catfish presence was associated with less temporal variation in macroinvertebrate composition.
In contrast, biomass and abundance were uninfluenced by either treatment,
indicating that the macroinvertebrate community within the invaded river was dominated
by taxa that were less responsive or adapted to the impact. By comparison, within the uninvaded Brak River, catfish introduction demonstrated an impact on macroinvertebrate
composition, a pattern that was consistent with observations from other studies on effects
of introduced fish on macroinvertebrates in previously uninvaded habitats (Carlisle and
Hawkins 1998; Knapp et al. 2001; Simon and Townsend 2003). This study, therefore,
revealed different macroinvertebrate responses to the presence of non-native catfish within
invaded and uninvaded streams, and suggests that the invasive catfish plays a role as a
disturbance in influencing macroinvertebrate communities.Although some studies indicate that macroinvertebrate communities can resist change to
disturbances through rapid colonisation and use of alternative refugia (Collier and Quinn
2003), this study suggests that adaptive responses to invasive predators may differ in
habitats with and without fish. Macroinvertebrates in fish-containing habitats tend to
develop anti-predator responses to fish (Schilling et al. 2009). In addition, within habitats
where invasive predators have establishment, macroinvertebrates may evolve to become
less vulnerable through behavioural and morphological adaptations in response to predation
(Simon and Townsend 2003; Abjornsson et al. 2004; Meissner and Moutka 2006;
Kitano et al. 2009). In contrast, within fishless or recently invaded habitats, macroinvertebrates
often lack such adaptations and may not recognise or respond appropriately to the
invader (Nystro®m et al. 2001). These contrasts may therefore explain the macroinvertebrate
composition and their different responses within the catfish-invaded Koonap River that had
other fish species, which include longfin eel (Anguilla mossambica), moggel (Labeo
umbratus) and smallmouth yellowfish (Labeobarbus aeneus), compared to the Brak River
that was fishless.
Several studies have shown that introduced predatory fish exert a pronounced negative
effect on macroinvertebrates in recently invaded habitats. This is because of the inability of
native macroinvertebrate prey to respond to predators that they do not naturally co-exist
with (Knapp et al. 2001; Stoks et al. 2003; Schilling et al. 2009), due to lack of co-evolved
adaptive mechanisms (Simon and Townsend 2003). Within the uninvaded Brak River,
catfish impact was reflected by a decrease in taxa diversity, richness and biomass. Catfish
impact was further supported by multivariate analysis that showed high variation in
macroinvertebrate composition in the Impact treatment plots, which suggests disruption of
the community by the invader. Macroinvertebrate abundance was, nonetheless, uninfluenced
by catfish presence. Although some studies have demonstrated impacts on macroinvertebrate
abundance (Englund and Polhemus 2001; Maezono et al. 2005), others
indicate that loss of certain taxa is mediated by an increase in abundance of those taxa that
are not negatively affected by the predators, suggesting that impacts may be related to the
response of individual macroinvertebrate taxa (Meissner and Moutka 2006). Assessment of
macroinvertebrate composition within the uninvaded Brak River reflected different
responses by individual taxa to catfish impact. In particular, the results indicated low
abundance of Coenagrionidae and Libellulidae odonates in the Impact treatment plots,
whereas the Chironomidae midges and Oligochaeta appeared uninfluenced by the presence
of the predator. The most common response of macroinvertebrates to predation by nonnative
fish is a decline in the densities of vulnerable taxa (Kadye and Magadza 2008;
Johnson et al. 2009; Duxbury et al. 2010). Large-bodied prey, such as odonates, are usually
the most vulnerable group in recently invaded habitats (Englund and Polhemus 2001;
Maezono and Miyashita 2003; Maezono et al. 2005) because invasive predators are
opportunistic feeders that tend to target the most conspicuous and accessible prey (Miller
and Crowl 2006; Johnson et al. 2009; Weyl et al. 2010). Odonates are usually dominant
macroinvertebrate predators that play a crucial role as keystone predators, especially in
fishless and uninvaded habitats (Donald and Anderson 2003), and their elimination by
invasive predators has been observed to correspond to an increase in the abundance of their
potential prey, which reflects trophic cascades (Maezono and Miyashita 2003; Phillips
et al. 2009). Within the Brak River, the high abundance of Chironomidae midges in the
Impact treatment relative to the Control treatment may suggest a positive response to low
abundance of odonate predators. Other studies have also reported invasion paradoxes
whereby the elimination of keystone predators by invasive predators facilitates invasions
by other species (Shurin 2001). Such facilitative invasions can have detrimental effect as the multiple invaders can interact at the expense of the native biota causing invasion
ëëmeltdowníí (Simberloff and Von Holle 1999).
In contrast to the uninvaded stream, within the invaded Koonap River, macroinvertebrates
showed little response to catfish impact. Some studies indicate that when non-native
predators become established, macroinvertebrates assemblages become less responsive as
they become dominated by taxa that are either uninfluenced by the presence of predators
(Meissner and Moutka 2006) or those that show local adaptation to predator presence
(Simon and Townsend 2003; Abjornsson et al. 2004). Local adaptations include predator
avoidance behaviour, such as altered drift patterns, use of interstitial spaces for refuge and
rapid dispersal by mobile taxa into habitat patches without predators (Douglas et al. 1994;
Englund et al. 2001; Schilling et al. 2009), and morphological adaptations, such as change
in size-structure of prey (Huryn 1998). Within the invaded Koonap River, the lack of a
macroinvertebrate response was particularly reflected by patterns in both abundance and
biomass that did not differ between treatments, and little variation in diversity and richness
within the Impact treatment, which suggest dominance of resilient taxa. Predator avoidance
behaviour was likely explained by high taxa diversity and richness observed within the
Control treatment plots relative to the Impact treatment plots in the invaded Koonap River.
This avoidance behaviour was also inferred from multivariate analyses that indicated
strong association of some taxa, such as Baetidae, Belostomatidae and Hydridae with the
Control treatment. In particular, the small-bodied baetid mayflies, Baetis spp., have been
observed to quickly recover under experimentally-induced predation disturbances, and
they actively searched for patches that provided more refuge (Meissner and Moutka 2006).
Mayflies are also known to disperse over a large area and to quickly adapt within disturbed
environments (Gibbs et al. 1998; Knapp et al. 2001; Effenberger et al. 2008). This suggests
that persistent disturbances induce changes to macroinvertebrate communities
(Muehlbauer et al. 2011), which result in assemblages dominated, in addition to the
resistant taxa, by those that can either quickly recolonise or find alternative refuge if the
disturbance does not impair the habitat (Niemi et al. 1990).
Resilient taxa were reflected by the Impact treatment within both the invaded and
uninvaded rivers. This was particularly reflected by the abundance of taxa such as leeches
(Hirudinea), earthworms (Oligochaeta) and midges (Chironomidae). Assessment of community
attributes based on multivariate analysis further indicated the association of the
leeches, midges and earthworms with Impact treatment in both rivers. These taxa usually
show little negative response to disturbances (Miller and Crowl 2006), including predation
(Knapp et al. 2001). Some studies have attributed the resilience of these macroinvertebrate
taxa to both their lifestyle because they are less active benthic-dwelling deposit-feeders
that are usually not preyed upon by the invasive predators (Carlisle and Hawkins 1998),
and indirect positive effects through elimination of their competitors (Knapp et al. 2001;
Johnson et al. 2009). Maezono et al. (2005) found no evidence of predation pressure on
these predation-resilient taxa in experimental treatments with non-native largemouth bass
(Micropterus salmoides) and bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochirus) that eliminated largebodied
taxa in Saitama Prefecture, eastern Japan. In the present study, leeches and midges
appeared to benefit from predation impact as they were more abundant in the presence of
catfish relative to its absence, whereas earthworms appeared to be unaffected by either
treatment. Leeches were unlikely to be negatively affected by the impact because they are
generally less mobile and tend to cling firmly to substrates by means of posterior sucker.
Some leeches are generally known to feed on a wide range of prey, whereas other leeches
are strictly parasitic (Graf et al. 2006; Sket and Trontelj 2008), although there was no
evidence of the latter in this study. Their high abundance during this study suggests that they were probably detritovorous. Similarly earthworms and midges are detritivores that
are known to be abundant within impacted habitats because they tend to burrow into or live
within soft substrata, and benefit from both the elimination of their competitors and
increased exposure to resources when a detritus-based food web dominates within disturbed
environments (Knapp et al. 2001; Ruetz et al. 2002; Miller and Crowl 2006; Weyl
et al. 2010).
From a disturbance perspective, this study reflected different levels of responses to
catfish impact within invaded and uninvaded streams. The overall impact patterns within
the two rivers supports Parkyn and Collierís (2004) observations on press disturbances
whose initial impact result in immediate changes in communities, as observed in the Brak
River, before they reach a new level comprising of a less responsive community, or a
community that is dominated by taxa that adapt quickly to the disturbance, and possible
maintained following a shift in species composition, as suggested by the patterns observed
in the Koonap River. Within the Eastern Cape region, the catfish has established in many
rivers and dams, and the main concern is on both its predation impact and potential to
influence trophic interrelationships (Kadye and Booth 2012). Macroinvertebrate recolonisation
and within stream-refugia may be compromised because the catfish can utilise a
wide range of habitats. This study revealed that the invasive catfish can influence macroinvertebrate
communities, which may have an effect on trophic dynamics. Efforts should
be made to protect uninvaded tributaries and, where possible, eradicate the invasive catfish.