xabstract
Non-native trout species have been associated
with many negative effects in receiving ecosystems.
The first aim of this study was to determine
the impact of non-native rainbow trout Oncorhynchus
mykiss on distribution and abundance of native
mountain catfish Amphilius uranoscopus within
Afro-montane streams in Nyanga Mountains, eastern
Zimbabwe. The second aim was to compare macroinvertebrate
community responses to the presence of
the trout and the catfish. We examined trout impact on
catfishís habitat associations, whereas macro-invertebrate
composition was compared using open fish and
fish exclosure experiments in habitats with and
without trout. Trout influenced both the distribution
and abundance of the catfish that occupied shallow
reaches possibly to avoid predation from trout that
occurred in the deeper habitats. Within trout invaded
reaches, most macro-invertebrate taxa were more
abundant in exclosure than open treatments. By
contrast, within trout-free reaches, most macro-invertebrates
either did not differ between treatments or
were generally more abundant in open than exclosure
treatments. This suggests that the macro-invertebrate
communities responded differently within invaded
and non-invaded reaches. By influencing distribution
and abundance of native biota, non-native rainbow
trout may have wider ecological effects, such as
influencing trophic interrelationships within invaded
habitats.
xintroduction
Invasion by non-native species is now recognised as
one of the major drivers of biodiversity loss globally
(Pimentel, 2011). Freshwater fishes are among the
most widely introduced vertebrate group worldwide,
and represent the one of the best-studied indicators of
invasion impacts (Rahel, 2002; Leprieur et al., 2008;
Strayer, 2010). Non-native fishes have disrupted the
biota of their recipient ecosystems directly through
predation and competition, and indirectly by altering
the behaviour and abundance of prey, and disturbing
food-web interrelationships (Flecker & Townsend,1994; Nystro®m & McIntosh, 2003; Baxter et al.,
2004). The general theory of invasion disturbances
posits that impacts are often a consequence of
cumulative effects related to the distribution range of
invaders, their relative abundances within that range,
and their per capita effects on individuals, populations
and communities of native species (Parker et al., 1999;
Dunham et al., 2002; Young et al., 2010; Kadye &
Booth, 2012). Assessing the role of invaders and their
associated impacts within freshwater habitats is
therefore essential in understanding the ecological
role of non-native species in their recipient
ecosystems.
Non-native trout species, especially of the genera
Oncorhynchus and Salmo, are among the most globally
widespread within freshwater ecosystems (Welcomme,
1988; Cambray, 2003; Crawford & Muir,
2008). Non-native trout species have become established
within both previously fishless habitats as new
functional groups and within habitats that already
contain fish (Simon & Townsend, 2003; Strauss et al.,
2006; Strayer, 2010). Their impacts on native fauna
have been observed to range from subtle, such as
influencing behaviour, distribution patterns and habitat
use (Simon & Townsend, 2003; Penaluna et al.,
2009), to local extirpation of local species (McIntosh,
2000; Bosch et al., 2006; Kadye & Magadza, 2008)
and broad ecosystem impacts such as trophic cascades
(Townsend & Crowl, 1991; Biggs et al., 2000;
Nystro®m et al., 2001). In southern Africa, trout species
have predominantly been introduced into the cool
upper reaches of rivers (Cambray, 2003). There are
serious ecological and conservation concerns in this
region because many of the upland tributaries are
important refugia for the remnant populations of
endemic and range-restricted native ichthyofauna,
such as mountain catfishes and other endemic cyprinid
barbs (Swartz et al., 2004; Tweddle et al., 2009; van
Oosterhout et al., 2009). The risk of trout invasions,
primarily through angler introductions, is high in
many southern African rivers, but their impacts are
less understood, and have rarely been assessed especially
in tropical southern Africa (Kadye & Magadza,
2008).
Two mountain catfishes, Amphilius uranoscopus
and A. natalensis, occur in the upper reaches of
streams in the Nyanga Mountains in eastern Zimbabwe
(Bell-Cross & Minshull, 1988; Marshall, 2011).
A. uranoscopus is the most common and widespread
of the two mountain catfishes (Marshall, 2011). The
region also harbours a number of unique macroinvertebrate
taxa, although most of them are yet to be
described to species (Chakona et al., 2008). Rainbow
trout Oncorynchus mykiss and brown trout Salmo
trutta were first introduced into these streams in the
early 1900s (Toots, 1970) and were supplemented
over the years by hatchery-reared fish (TurnbullKemp,
1957; MacGown, 1970). The stocking of these
fishes is now much less frequent and brown trout have
disappeared from most streams, but rainbow trout is
still common, although their numbers may have
declined in some of the streams (Marshall, 2011).
Non-native rainbow trout has been observed to prey on
both the mountain catfish and macro-invertebrates
within many streams in Nyanga Mountains (Butler &
Marshall, 1996). Some studies elsewhere have noted
that although the mountain catfish is a widespread
species, local extirpations are likely where its preferred
habitat overlaps with that of rainbow trout
(Kadye & Magadza, 2008; van Oosterhout et al.,
2009). Furthermore, within trout invaded streams,
direct predation and indirect influence on the behaviour
have been observed to influence both distribution
and abundance of benthic macro-invertebrates communities
(Simon & Townsend, 2003; Meissner &
Moutka, 2006). Therefore, examining the fish species
and habitat inter-relationships is important in determining
whether specific habitats act as refugia within
invaded streams (van Oosterhout et al., 2009). In
addition, since macro-invertebrates are an integral
component of headwater streams, it is important to
examine their community dynamics in relation to the
presence of non-native rainbow trout.
In this study, we first examined the impact of
rainbow trout on the distribution and abundance of the
mountain catfish by assessing whether trout influenced
the catfishís habitat associations. Second, we compared
benthic macro-invertebrate composition within
invaded and non-invaded localities using short-term
fish-exclosures and open-fish experiments. We
hypothesized that the native mountain catfish would
utilise a wide range of habitats in trout-free reaches,
but would select habitats that minimise predation risk
in reaches with trout. We also hypothesized that the
non-native rainbow trout would cause detectable
changes in macro-invertebrate composition as some
taxa would be susceptible to predation, whereas the
native mountain catfish would have subtle effects on macro-invertebrate composition because it has coevolved
with its potential prey.
xmethods
The Nyanga Mountains lie in the northern part of the
mountain range that forms the border between Zimbabwe
and Mozambique (Fig. 1). The greater part of
the plateau lies at altitudes above 1,800 m, rising to
2,593 m on Mount Nyangani, the highest point in
Zimbabwe. Most of the area is located within the
Nyanga National Park, and consists of soils derived
from granite and dolerite, and covered by Afromontane
grassland and forest patches. Air temperatures
are relatively low, with a maximum of 25C and
mean annual temperatures between 15 and 18C. The
annual rainfall is around 1,700 mm, falling mostly
between OctoberñApril. Frost is common during the
months of May to August. Streams and rivers in the
park are perennial, flowing west and north-west into
the Zambezi system, through the Nyangombe and
Kairezi Rivers, and east through the Pungwe River
system. The mountain catfish occurs in all major
streams and their tributaries within the national park.
Other fish species that occur within the region include
the Natal mountain catfish A. natalensis and the
mottled eel Anguilla bengalensis, but these were not
collected during this study. Rainbow trout was introduced
into the headwaters of all major streams and
occurs at altitude greater than 1,800 m where temperature
is generally low. Within Mare River, a major
tributary of Nyamombe, the rainbow trout occurs
within impoundments but has not established in
the headwater sections of the river. Sampling for
this study was restricted to first order headwater
streams.Fish sampling was conducted in April, June and
September 2009. Samples were collected at seven sites
from four headwater streams located at altitudes
greater than 1,800 m (Fig. 1). The scarcity of troutfree
streams precluded a multiple trout-free and troutinvaded
experimental design, and constrained the
study design to one trout-free and three trout-invaded
streams. In order to offset the potential for confounded
comparisons resulting from the limited real replication
of this design, we selected sites that had similar
riparian vegetation that was dominated by Afromontane
grasslands and had similar physicochemical
parameters (Bere et al. 2013). This was to insure that
study sites were similar and no variables other than
trout presence differed among them. Three sites were
selected in Nyamombe River system; one in the
headwaters of the main-stem above a waterfall where
rainbow trout was present, and two in the headwaters
of Mare River where rainbow trout was absent. Four
other sites were in two headwater streams of the
Pungwe River system where rainbow trout was
present Each sampling site was divided into three reaches,
about 30ñ50-m long, each of which was then blocked
with a fine meshed net at either end before sampling.
The sampling reaches within each site were approximately
100 m apart. This constituted 21 sampling
reaches in total. The total length of the sampled reach
was measured, and ten transects were set perpendicular
to the direction of flow to measure physical habitat
variables within each reach. The measurements made
were depth and substrate types at three points along
each transect and width for each transect. At each
point, substrate composition was visually assessed
within a radius of 30 cm. There were therefore 30
points assessed for depth and substrate composition at
each reach. Each substrate category was expressed as a
proportion (%) based on these points for each reach
(Table 1). The substrate types were categorised
following Gorman & Karr (1978) and Schlosser
(1982) as silt (\0.05 cm), sand (0.05ñ2 cm), gravel
(2ñ10 cm), pebble (10ñ30 cm), and boulder
(30ñ50 cm). Velocity was measured at the centre of
each transect using an FP201 current meter (Global
Water Inc., CA, USA). The sampled reaches ranged
from 0.7 to 1.9 m and 30 to 50 m in width and length,
respectively (Table 1). Fish were captured by a single
pass with a Deka 3000 Backpack electric fisher
powered by a 12 V battery. Captured fish were
identified to species and measured for standard length
(SL) To compare macro-invertebrate responses to presence
of native and non-native fish, we conducted an
experiment in two headwater streams; one without
the rainbow trout (sites 2, 3) and another with the
rainbow trout (sites 4, 5) (Fig. 1). The lack of multiple
trout-free streams was compensated by using cage
experiments that were replicated within streams that
had comparable environmental conditions. We considered
this as the most rigorous approach available to
offset the potential for the responses to be confounded
by small-scale prey movements and historical effects
of trout presence. In each stream, we used a completely
randomised experimental design with two
treatments: (1) open fish and (2) fish exclosure. Each
treatment had five replicate cages. Experimental
cages, each measuring 2 9 1 9 1 m in length, width
and height, respectively, were constructed on steel
frames. We chose these dimensions to allow easy
access for sampling macro-invertebrates from an area
of 1 m2 within each cage. Fish exclosures were fitted
with fine gauze mesh (3 mm) and a 30-cm skirt that
was secured at the bottom to prevent fish from
entering. Open fish cages were set as steel frames that
were secured at the bottom. The cages were placed at
depths of 0.2ñ0.5 m with homogenous pebble substrate
that was the dominant substratum. All cages
were deployed in April and sampled in June and
September 2009. During sampling, pebbles were
picked and washed with stream water into a sampling
bucket and then filtered through a macro-invertebrate
net (mesh size 250 lm). The animals were preserved
in 70% ethanol. In the laboratory, the animals were
sorted and identified to genus for most taxa using an
Olympus (SZX10) stereomicroscope at 109 magnifi-
cation. The identification followed the key of Harrison
(2002) for Chironomidae, de Moore (2002) for
Simuliidae, Barber-James & Lugo-Ortiz (2003) for
Ephemeroptera, de Moore and Scott (2003) for
Trichoptera and Samways & Wilmot (2003) for
Odonata.The rainbow trout and the mountain catfish distribution
were recorded based on both the presence/absence
and relative abundance. The relative abundance of fish
was expressed as catch per unit effort (CPUE) as
numbers caught per minute of electric fishing (Kadye
& Marshall, 2007). To determine the rainbow trout
impact on the mountain catfish distribution, we used a
mixed logistic regression, with mountain catfish
distribution (presence/absence) as a response, habitat
variables as continuous variables and rainbow trout
presence/absence as a class variable. Collinearity
among habitat variables was initially detected using
variance inflation factor (VIF) for each regression
coefficient. Variables with VIF [5 were considered to
indicate collinearity (Heiberger & Holland, 2004) and
were removed from the analysis. A forward stepwise
procedure was then used to select best predictor
variables. Within the stepwise procedure, variables
were penalised using the Akaikeís information criterion
(AIC), which was defined as: AIC º 2 lnLﬁ ˛
2k, where L is the maximised likelihood function for
the model and k is the number of parameters in the
fitted model. The logistic regression coefficients were
 used to evaluate the change in odds ratios between the
predictor variables and their response. The odds ratio
is the multiplicative factor by which the odds of a
response variable changes in relation to change in the
predictor variable (Quinn & Keough, 2002). v2
Goodness-of-fit test, based on residual deviance, was
used to test the significance of the model.
To determine trout impact on catfish abundance, we
first compared catfish CPUE between localities with and
without trout. We then used linear mixed-effects models
to compare the relationship between the mountain
catfish CPUE and habitat in localities with and without
the rainbow trout. The fixed effects were the habitat
variables and the random-effects were sites (S) and
reaches nested within sites (S(R)). The models were of
the form: yi º Xib ˛ Zibi ˛ ei, where Xi was the ni  p
matrix of the fixed-effects (habitat variables), b was
the p  1 vector of fixed-effects coefficients, Zi was
the ni  q matrix of the random effects (S(R)),
bi  N 0; r2  ﬁ was the q  1 vector of random-effects
coefficients, ei  N 0; r2  ﬁ was the residual error. This
was tested under the null hypothesis of independence
(i.e., no relationship) between the mountain catfish
CPUE and predictor variables both for sites with or
without trout. All environmental variables transformed
into z scores prior to the analyses.
Macro-invertebrate abundance data for individual
taxa were ln(x ? 1)-transformed to satisfy the requirements
of normally distributed residuals and homoscedasticity.
ShapiroñWilksí test was used to test for
normality. We first used linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) with a stepwise procedure to discern the
differences in macro-invertebrate composition
between the two streams and their treatments. For
each of the streams, multivariate analysis of variance
(MANOVA) and single factor ANOVA were then
used to compare the treatments (T) and sampling
periods nested within treatments TPﬁﬁ. All analyses
were conducted in R (R Development Core Team,
2012). The following libraries were used: stats for
logistic regression, nlme for linear mixed-effect models
and MASS for MANOVA and LDA analyses.

xresults
The sampled reaches tended to be shallow with a mean
depth range of 35ñ55 cm, and a mean flow range of
0.4ñ0.9 m s-1 (Table 1). Pebbles, boulders, and
gravel were the most common substrate types within
all reaches. The rainbow trout was the most widespread
species, occurring in 15 of the 21 reaches. In
comparison, the mountain catfish was collected in 10
of the 21 sampled reaches. The logistic regression
model showed that the mountain catfish distribution
was significantly negatively (likelihood-ratio test,
P\0.001) associated with the presence of rainbow
trout and depth. Model comparisons showed that the
trout model was significantly better than the model
without trout. Regression models for these variables
indicated that the odds ratios for mountain catfish
distribution decreased by 6.4 in the presence of
rainbow trout, whereas increasing depth decreased
the odds ratios for mountain catfish distribution by 2.4.
v2 Goodness-of-fit test for the mixed logistic regression
was not statistically significant (v2
60, P[0.05),
indicating adequate fit of the model to the data.
The mountain catfish was significantly abundant
(t = 6.42, P\0.01) in reaches without rainbow trout
(mean CPUE = 2.42 ± 1.7 fish per minute) compared
to those that had trout (mean CPUE = 0.10 ± 2.5 fish
per minute). In reaches with rainbow trout, comparisons
of the fish and habitat relationship based on the
linear mixed-effects model showed a significant
(F1;20 = 5.5, P\0.05) negative relationship between
the mountain catfish CPUE and depth (Table 2). By
contrast, within rainbow trout-free reaches, the mountain
catfish CPUE was significantly (F1;8 = 5.8,
P\0.05) negatively related to boulder substrate and
positively related to depth (F1;8 = 3.6, P = 0.1).
A total of 20 macro-invertebrate taxa, representing
four orders were collected from the cages (Table 3). In
general, large-bodied Odonate taxa Atoconeura sp.
and Aeshna sp. were more abundant in Mare River that
had no trout compared to Pungwe River that had trout.
By contrast, small bodied macro-invertebrates, such as
Baetis spp., Chironominae and Simulium sp. were
more abundant within Pungwe River compared to
Mare River. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
showed significant differences between rivers and
their treatments (Wilksí k = 0.10, F9;30 = 31.9,
P\0.01). The ordination biplot showed the separation
of the rivers on the first discriminant axis (LDA 1)
with the treatments being separated on the second
discriminant axis (LDA 2) (Fig. 2). Comparisons of
macro-invertebrate composition between treatments indicated significant differences for both the Mare
River (MANOVA F9,8 = 9.7, P\0.01) that had no
trout and the Pungwe River (MANOVA F5,12 = 33.5,
P\0.01) that had trout. Within the Mare River, most
macro-invertebrates were either more abundant in the
open than the exclosure, such as Pseudoponnata,
Limnophila and the Trichopteran taxa Hydropsyche
and Cheumatopsyche, or did not differ between
treatments, such as Euthralus sp. and Afronurus sp.
An exception was Baetis spp. and Caenis sp. that were
more abundant in the exclosure than the open treatment
(Fig. 3). In this river, the abundances of Baetis
spp., Hydropsyche sp. 1, Cheumatopsyche spp. and
Limnophila sp. differed significantly between treatments
(ANOVA, P\0.05) (Table 4). Furthermore,
Baetis spp., Hydropsyche sp. 1, Afronurus sp., Caenis
sp., and Euthralus sp. abundances differed signifi-
cantly (nested ANOVA, P\0.05) between sampling
periods. Within Pungwe River, all macro-invertebrate
taxa were generally more abundant in exclosure than
open treatment (Fig. 3), with Baetis spp., Caenis
sp.and Euthralus sp. exhibiting significant differences
between treatments (ANOVA, P\0.05) and between
sampling periods (nested ANOVA, P\0.05),
whereas Cheumatopsyche spp. and Afronurus sp. only
showed significant differences between sampling
periods (nested ANOVA P\0.05) (Table 4).
xdiscussion
The hypothesis that in the absence of the rainbow trout
O. mykiss, the native mountain catfish A. uranoscopus
would utilise a wide range of habitats use was supported
because individuals of the mountain catfish were
collected from all the habitats sampled within trout-free
reaches in this study. Within the rainbow trout-free
stream, the mountain catfish exploited a broad range of
depths (35ñ54 cm) and occurred in reaches with diverse
bottom substrates although it appeared to avoid habitats
with high proportion of boulders. This result was
consistent with studies by Fouche et al. (2005) and
van Oosterhout et al. (2009) who investigated habitat
use of the mountain catfish in undisturbed mountain
streams in South Africa. In undisturbed habitats, the
mountain catfish is known to be ubiquitous, preferring
coarse substrates that provide both refuge and foraging
ground in both shallow and deep habitats. Within
headwater streams, such habitats are often characterised
by low temperature, high flow rate, and high dissolved
oxygen (Kadye et al., 2008; van Oosterhout et al., 2009).
Measurable changes in the mountain catfish abundance
and habitat use were, however, detected in
reaches that contained the rainbow trout. In the presence
of rainbow trout, depth was found to be the strongest
predictor of both mountain catfish distribution and
abundance. The results revealed high probably of catfish
occurring in shallow habitats in sites with trout, whereas
the detection of this species was lowest in deeper
habitats when the rainbow trout was present. Similarly,
the mountain catfish abundance decreased with increasing
depth in the presence of trout. Thus, there was strong
evidence of rainbow trout effect on both distribution and
abundance of mountain catfish in the tributaries of the
Nyanga Mountains. Kadye & Magadza (2008) documented
similar spatial segregation between non-native
rainbow trout and mountain catfish on the Nyika Plateau
in Malawi. Shifts in habitat selection and decrease in
abundance of native fishes in trout-invaded streams have
been reported elsewhere. For example Morita et al.(2004) noted that native white-spotted charr Salvelinus
leucomaenis within headwater reaches of the Hekirichi
River in Japan preferred pools to riffles in the absence of
non-native trout, but predominantly utilised shallow
riffles in the presence of trout. Invasion by non-native
trout has also been implicated as the major causal factor
of the disjunct distributions of the roundhead and
flathead galaxiids in New Zealand (Townsend, 1996),
and Galaxias truttaceus in Australia (Ault & White,
1994). The impact of trout species on native stream-fish
densities has been reported by McDowall (2003) who
found that densities of Galaxias divergens were twice as
high in trout-free habitats compared to invaded habitats.
The rainbow trout could have altered mountain
catfish habitat associations and abundances through
direct predation, as reported from previous studies
(Butler & Marshall, 1996; Marriott et al., 1997; Kadye
& Magadza, 2008). Because deeper habitats provide
refugia and optimal feeding habitats for trout (McIntosh,
2000; Morita et al., 2004; Kadye et al., 2008),
particularly the larger-sized individuals (pers. obs),
predation pressure on the mountain catfish is likely to
be highest in the deeper pools. This could explain why
the catfish retreated into shallow habitats that were
likely to curtail hunting or predation success of the
large-sized trout. Instances of native species cooccurring
with trout have been observed to be
associated with either strong predatorñprey interactions
(McIntosh, 2000), or within habitats containing
juvenile trout that have less predatory impact (Glova et al., 1992). Predation impact by trout has also been
reported to be size-dependent (Glova, 2003; Bonnett
& McIntosh, 2004). van Oosterhout et al. (2009)
suggested that, due to their small size, the mountain
catfish utilises the shallow riffles as daytime refugia
from predation by large trout in the deeper open
waters, but would possibly forage in the deeper
habitats at night. This combination of behaviour
(nocturnal feeding) and morphological adaptation,
owing to their slender and dorsoventrally compressed
body which allows maintenance of position in shallow
riffle habitats with faster current velocity (van Oosterhout
et al., 2009), may explain the ability of the
mountain catfish to persist, albeit in low abundance,
within trout-invaded streams (Kadye & Magadza,
2008). It is likely, however, that the mountain catfish
with trout-invaded reaches may occupy sub-optimal
habitat, which may influence their foraging, recruiting,
and reproductive success (Ngugi et al. 2009). Cases
where native taxa have been forced to occupy
marginal or sub-optimal habitats have been documented
in other studies for native fishes (Morita et al.,
2004; Kadye & Magadza, 2008; Ngugi et al., 2009)
and amphibians (Bosch et al., 2006). These marginal
habitats may, however, be less optimal and could
further expose the catfish to terrestrial predators such
as otters and predatory birds, and therefore may not be
suitable for long-term sustenance of large catfish
populations. Other studies on catfishes have shown
high predation pressure by terrestrial predators on
large individuals at shallow depths (Power, 1984).
The hypothesis that the macro-invertebrate assemblages
would show differential responses to the impacts
of the two fish species considered in this study, catfish
and trout, was supported. It was likely that certain
macro-invertebrates had already been eliminated
through predation by trout within the invaded reaches.
For example, Butler & Marshall (1996) reported trout
predation on river crab Potamonautes perlatus and
drifting macro-invertebrates within the study area.
During this study, we found low abundance of Odonate
taxa within trout-invaded compared to the uninvaded
reaches. Many studies have shown that large predatory
macro-invertebrates are vulnerable to trout predation
(Flecker & Townsend, 1994; Schofield et al., 1988).
Since invasive predators, such as trout, are opportunistic
feeders, they tend to target the most conspicuous and
accessible prey that usually result in a corresponding
decline in their abundance and biomass (Englund &
Polhemus, 2001; Meissner & Moutka, 2006; Miller &
Crowl, 2006; Johnson et al., 2009). Odonates are
considered to be keystone macro-invertebrate predators
(Fincke et al., 1997) that regulate abundance of their
prey thereby reducing dominance of certain species and
maintaining diversity (Donald & Anderson, 2003). In
this study, the high abundance of some taxa such as
Baetis spp., Chironominae and Simulium sp., which are
considered the common prey, may suggest a response to
the low abundance of macro-invertebrate predators in
habitats with trout. By contrast, the low abundance of
these macro-invertebrate taxa within trout-free habitats
is reflective of the importance of both catfish and macroinvertebrate
predators as regulators of community
composition.
Comparisons of macro-invertebrate composition
between experimental treatments suggest differential
responses to fish in both rivers. Within trout-free
zones, the macro-invertebrates were either abundant in
exclosure treatment or did not differ between treatments,
except for Baetis spp. and Caenis sp. that were
abundant in open treatment. This suggests that most
macro-invertebrates were either less responsive to the
presence of the mountain catfish as a natural predator
or did not recruit successfully within the exclosure
treatment. Experimental cage design, such as the fine
mesh and the presence of a skirt at the bottom, could also have had a confounding influence on the potential
recruitment and establishment of benthically dispersing
macro-invertebrates, such as trichopterans. Trichopteran
caddis flies, which are considered to be the
most important prey for catfish (van Oosterhout et al.,
2009), were more abundant in open than exclosure
treatment in Mare River. Nevertheless, taxa such as
Baetis spp. and Caenis sp. that were considered the
most common prey were relative abundance in the
exclosure treatment. This suggests predator avoidance
behaviour by these taxa, possibly from both the
mountain catfish and predatory odonate taxa that were
abundant in Mare River. Chakona et al. (2007) showed
that the population densities of these taxa were
regulated by both fish and odonate predators. By
comparison, within trout-invaded Pungwe River, most
macro-invertebrates were abundant in exclosure compared
to open treatments. In particular, we found high
abundances of Baetis spp. and Caenis sp. in exclosure
compared to open treatments. This suggests a response to the presence of trout as the dominant predator since
both the mountain catfish and large predatory macroinvertebrates
were generally low in abundance. Many
studies have shown that epibenthic, drift-prone grazers
such as Baetis spp. often face high predation risk from
predators such as trout (Diehl et al., 2000; De Crespin
De Billy and Usseglio-Polatera 2002). Often, macroinvertebrates
within invaded habitats tend to exhibit
predator avoidance behaviour that is shown by their
low densities in patches where predation is likely to be
high (Englund et al., 2001). The influx of macroinvertebrates
into the exclosure treatment that was
observed within the trout-invaded reaches suggests an
adaptive response that may reflect short-term changes
due to predation and behaviour of individual taxa.
Overall, the observed patterns suggest that although
the mountain catfish is considered to be a top predator,
it had less impact on macro-invertebrate density and
composition compared to rainbow trout. Introduced
predators such as trout have been found to have both
direct impact through predation and indirect impact by
influencing the responses and behaviours of native
biota (Simon & Townsend, 2003).This study has revealed that the mountain catfish
occurred at wide depth ranges in uninvaded stream
reaches. The presence of rainbow trout, however, was
associated with use of shallow habitats and a significant
reduction in abundances for the mountain catfish
where both species co-occurred. These shallow marginal
habitats are most likely to be less ideal for
sustenance of large mountain catfish populations and
would further expose the mountain catfish to terrestrial
predators such as otters and predatory birds. The high
abundance of most macro-invertebrates in exclosure compared to open treatments within trout-invaded
reaches suggests an influence of trout on macroinvertebrate
community. This influence may be related
to both predation and altered behaviours of different
macro-invertebrate taxa. The observed patterns for
both the mountain catfish and macro-invertebrates in
response to the presence of non-native rainbow trout
may have ecological implications such as trophic
cascades and predatorñprey relationships.