xabstract
Oriental weatherloach (Misgurnus anguillicaudatus), a
benthic freshwater fish species native to East Asia, was first recorded in
Australian freshwater systems in 1984. Although this species is widely
established around the world, very little is known about its potential
impacts as an invader. We gathered field data to parameterise a
mesocosm experiment investigating the impacts of Oriental weatherloach
in Southeastern Australia. During this experiment, Oriental weatherloach
caused significant reductions in macroinvertebrate numbers and biomass.
Additionally, Oriental weatherloach were associated with elevated
ammonia, nitrate/nitrite (NOx), and turbidity levels. Because of issues
involved in scaling up mesocosm experiments we are not able to
conclusively determine that Oriental weatherloach are having large
impacts in natural systems. Our results come from mesocosms designed
to mimic natural conditions, however, and they thus indicate that
ecological impacts may be occurring, and underline the need for further
research and control.
xintroduction
Invasive species have greatly altered freshwater ecosystems
worldwide, with impacts including loss of
biodiversity (Moyle & Leidy 1992; Allan & Flecker
1993; Richter et al. 1997), reduced ranges of native
species (e.g., Townsend 1996), introduction of parasites
(e.g., Dove & Ernst 1998; Bond 2005) and
habitat changes (e.g., Bially & MacIsaac 2000). These
impacts are likely to continue for the foreseeable
future, with nonindigenous species predicted to be the
single greatest driver of global biodiversity loss in
lakes, and the third greatest in streams, over the next
century (Sala et al. 2000).
Approximately 34 nonindigenous freshwater fish
species are established in Australia (Lintermans 2004).
Although little has been published regarding the
impacts of these species, it is known that brown trout
(Salmo trutta) can exclude the native mountain
galaxias (Galaxias olidus) and change invertebrate
communities in streams (Fletcher 1986); carp (Cyprinus
carpio) can increase turbidity and the prevalence
of algal blooms in billabongs (King et al. 1997); and
mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki) prey heavily upon
small native fish (Howe et al. 1997; Ivantsoff 1999).
Thus, introduced freshwater fish are having large
impacts on Australian freshwater ecosystems, but their
overall impacts are not well understood (Koehn &
MacKenzie 2004).
Oriental weatherloach (Misgurnus anguillicaudatus)
are a small (£20 cm total length) bottom-dwelling
fish native to East Asia, from Russia in the north,
through Korea, Japan, China, Vietnam and into Burma
(Berg 1962). They feed by taking sediment into their
mouths and filtering out food items, with barbels
around the mouth helping to sense prey (Watanabe &
Hidaka 1983). In their native range Oriental weatherloach
inhabit both lotic and lentic systems and are
particularly prevalent in rice paddies where their
activity uproots weeds, and where they are thus considered beneficial by rice farmers (Kim et al.
1994). The first record of Oriental weatherloach
establishment beyond their native range is in Hawaii,
where they were released by migrants sometime before
1906 (Maciolek 1984). Oriental weatherloach are also
a popular aquarium fish, and releases from this
industry have led to their establishment in the USA
sometime prior to the 1950s (Courtenay 1997), the
Philippines (Welcomme 1984), Germany (Freyhof &
Korte 2005), Mexico (Contreras & Escalante 1984)
and Palau (Maciolek 1984). This worldwide range
continues to expand, as evidenced by the 1999
discovery of a new population in Washington State,
USA (Tabor et al. 2001). Recent collections from
Washington State indicate that this population has
either spread 35 km in 2 years or that another
population has become established nearby (R. Tabor,
US Fish and Wildlife Service, personal communication).
Despite their long history as a non-native
species, however, there are no published investigations
of Oriental weatherloach impacts.
From the early 1960s until their sale was banned in
1986, Oriental weatherloach were imported to Australia
by the aquarium industry at a rate of up to 50,000 per
year (Koster et al. 2002a). The first confirmed
naturalised population of this species was discovered
in the Yarra River, Victoria, in 1984 (Allen 1984).
Subsequent introductions and population range expansions
have lead to Oriental weatherloach now being
established in up to 12 river systems in Victoria, four
river systems in the Australian Capital Territory and four
river systems in New South Wales (Fig. 1; Koster et al.
2002a). A small population was found in Queensland,
and this was successfully eradicated in 1990 (Koster
et al. 2002a). Given that Oriental weatherloach populations
in Australia are now widespread, and considering
that there is currently no known way to eliminate
large populations, Oriental weatherloach should be
considered a permanent part of the Australian fauna.
We conducted field surveys and a mesocosm
experiment to investigate the impacts of Oriental
weatherloach in Australian freshwaters. Field surveys
were brief, and were conducted to determine whether
habitat associations, maximum population densities
and diet of this species are similar in Southeastern
Australia to other regions where Oriental weatherloach
have been studied in the field. Results from these
surveys informed the design and parameterisation of a
mesocosm experiment that examined the direct effects
of Oriental weatherloach feeding on invertebrate communities, and their effects on water column
turbidity, nutrient content and phytopigment mass.
Our first hypothesis for the mesocosm experiment was
that Oriental weatherloach feeding would reduce
population size and biomass of benthic invertebrates,
which are known from other studies to be their main
prey. Additionally, we hypothesised that Oriental
weatherloach would increase turbidity and water
column nutrients through bioturbation and excretion.
In all cases, we hypothesised that impacts would be
positively related to Oriental weatherloach density.
xmethods
Two creeks (Mullum Mullum Creek, Ringwood, and
Merri Creek, Coburg) and one pond (Jells Park,
Wheelers Hill) in the Melbourne metropolitan area
were each surveyed in early March and May, 2000.
Surveys were conducted using a backpack electrofisher
(model 12B; Smith-Root, Vancouver, WA, USA)
and hand nets when appropriate. All habitats along
approx. 500 m reaches were sampled for each creek,
with the exception of some pools (<5% of total
habitat) in Merri Creek that were too deep to safely
electrofish. All electrofishing surveys were single pass,
except when specific habitats were targeted (see
below). Hand nets were used in Jells pond because
the water was too turbid to see fish as they responded
to the electroshocker. Captured Oriental weatherloach
were killed on site with an overdose of benzocaine
(ethyl-p-aminobenzoate) (Schreck & Moyle 1990).
We were specifically interested in maximum densities
of Oriental weatherloach so that we could create
mesocosm treatments representing the range of natural
densities. Densities were estimated by dividing the
number of fish captured in a habitat by an estimate of
the area sampled. In creeks, we sampled all pools,
riffles and backwaters. Estimated densities were higher
in muddy backwaters than other habitats, so, for
efficiency, we concentrated our sampling in backwaters.
We found the same pattern during the May
sampling period when highest densities were also
found in muddy backwaters. Again, we concentrated
our sampling on these habitats. These backwaters were
small and we could thus conduct the equivalent of
multiple pass electrofishing. To do this we would fish
the area once, wait several minutes and then repeat.
Numbers captured during the second pass were always
low (£30% of total fish caught). Because we had to drag
hand nets through mud to capture fish in Jells pond it
was not possible to estimate densities for this habitat.
To determine whether Oriental weatherloach feed in
the same way in Southeastern Australia as in Japan
(Watanabe & Hidaka 1983), we removed the entire gut
tracts of 36 captured fish. Invertebrates in these
samples were quantified to the lowest possible taxonomic
level. Plant material, such as macrophytes,
algae and diatoms, was also searched for and identified
at this level, using a compound microscope when
necessary. Chironomid, ostracod and oligochaete body
parts were prevalent in Oriental weatherloach guts, but
quantifying actual consumption for these taxa is not
straightforward. Chironomid head capsules and ostracod
valves decompose slowly and could be ingested as
Oriental weatherloach forage for other food. To reduce
the risk of overcounting these taxa, we only counted
ostracods when the valves were found connected, and
chironomids when some soft tissue remained attached
to the head capsule. These were considered indications
that the invertebrates had been consumed alive.
Oligochaetes are rapidly digested in fish guts and the
only evidence of their consumption is the presence of
setae. We recorded the presence of setae, but made no
attempt to quantify abundance. We interpret the
presence of setae cautiously because, as for chironomid
heads and single ostracod valves, they could be
inadvertently ingested as Oriental weatherloach feed.Based on our survey results, we conducted our
mesocosm experiment during autumn/winter when
realistically sized mesocosms could represent the cool
season habitat of this species. To ensure that the
habitat was also realistic, we introduced a muddy
substrate to the mesocosms. Twelve outdoor mesocosms
(1.4 ∑ 0.5 m), placed on the ground, were filled
to a depth of 10 cm with sediment from a local pond.
Tap water was added to give a total depth of 25 cm.
Mesocosms were left undisturbed for 2 weeks to allow
invertebrates (mostly oligochaetes, chironomids and
ostracods, see Results) introduced with the sediment to
settle.
Two densities of Oriental weatherloach (one and
three fish per tub or 1.4 and 4.3 fish∆m)2
, respectively)
were established and each replicated four times. Four
mesocosms were retained as controls (0 fish∆m)2
), and
the experiment ran undisturbed for 67 days beginning in
mid-May, 2000 (see below). Treatments and sampling
order were randomly assigned, and mesocosms were
covered with shade cloth to prevent the entry of detritus.
This experiment was conducted in the Jock Marshall
Reserve at Monash University, Clayton campus.
Although water temperatures in the mesocosms were
not measured they would have closely tracked air
temperature because mesocosms were placed on the
ground and thus had a large exposed surface area.
Average 24-h air temperature maxima and minima
during the experiment were, respectively, 15.4 and
9.1 C (http://www.bom.gov.au).
The 16 fish used in the mesocosm experiment were
captured from Mullum Mullum Creek and allowed to
acclimate at the Jock Marshall Reserve for 2 weeks
prior to the experiment. They ranged in length from
101 to 171 mm (mean ± SD º 126 ± 21 mm) and
were randomly assigned to the treatment mesocosms.
We divided each mesocosm into 64 separate grid
cells, and used this grid to locate sampling sites.
To ensure that no cell was sampled twice, all sampling
sites for each mesocosm were randomly assigned
(without replacement) before the experiment began.
To determine the effects of Oriental weatherloach
feeding on invertebrates we took eight sediment
cores (depth º 5 cm, diameter º 4.7 cm, volume º
86.7 cm3
) before fish were added, and again at the end
of the experiment. Samples were washed through a 250-
lm sieve and all invertebrates removed live. Invertebrates
were preserved in 70% ethanol and later counted
and identified. Initial cores were taken between 15 and
25 May 2000, and the final cores between 20 and 30 July
2000. After identification, all invertebrates were dried in
a 60 C oven and aggregated by treatment and sampling
time. Change in weight from before the experiment to
the final samples was taken as an indication of total
biomass change during the experiment.
Because all mesocosms were covered with shade
cloth they were isolated from aerial recruitment of
invertebrates. This is unlikely to have affected results
as chironomids are the only such group found in
large numbers, and winter recruitment by this family
is rare. Also, because all mesocosms were covered in
shade cloth no treatment-level bias could be introduced.
Water samples were taken from each mesocosm at
the end of the experiment, but before the final
invertebrate cores were removed. Turbidity in each
water sample was determined using a HACH Model
2100A turbidimeter (HACH Company, Loveland, CO,
USA). Samples were also analysed for nitrate and
nitrite (NOx-N), soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP-P)
and ammonia-N concentrations using Flow injection
analysis (Lachat QuickChem 8000, Lachat Instruments,
Loveland, CO, USA).
An additional 100 ml of water was collected from
each mesocosm the day before the experiment ended
for chlorophyll analysis. Chlorophyll a and phaeophytin
levels in each sample were quantified using a
spectrophotometer according to standard methods
(APHA 1995). Total phytopigment (chlorophyll a
plus phaeophytin) mass was established using the
Lorenzen (1967) equations.
Data analysis
Direct effects of Oriental weatherloach feeding (i.e.,
effects on invertebrate numbers and biomass) were
analysed by one-way anova. Proportional change
from before samples to after samples was used as the
dependent variable, with treatment as the independent
variable (4.3, 1.4 or 0 fish∆m)2
). Repeated measures
anova was not appropriate because initial invertebrate
densities varied among tubs (see Results). Tukeyís test
was used to test for significant differences between
paired treatments, and log10(x+1) transformations were
used in each analysis to meet anova assumptions. Our
analysis of proportional change assumes a correlation
between before and after samples. To test this
assumption we conducted correlations of the total
number of invertebrates observed between the beginning
and the end of the experiment for each treatment
level.
Chlorophyll and water quality samples were only
taken at the end of the experiment. In each of these
cases we assumed that no significant differences
existed among treatments before the experiment
because tub treatment was randomly assigned. Thus,
we analysed these results with one-way anova. Any
pre-existing differences would have added noise to the
analyses, and would thus make our tests conservative
(i.e., less likely to find a significant result).

xresults
Oriental weatherloach were found in all habitats (riffle,
pool, backwater) surveyed during March, with highest
estimated densities occurring in backwaters. From
sampling approximately 20 backwaters in Mullum
Mullum and Merri creeks, we found densities to be in
the range of 1ñ5 fish∆m)2
, and most commonly
(50% of backwaters) 2ñ3 fish∆m)2
. During the May
sampling period Oriental weatherloach were overwhelmingly
captured as they came out of fine
sediments in muddy backwaters (again, approximately
20 backwaters sampled), at densities of 2ñ7 fish∆m)2
,
and most commonly in the range (60% of backwaters)
of 4ñ5 fish∆m)2
. Similar densities have been
recorded elsewhere in Australia. During single-pass
electrofishing surveys of cobble and silt substrate in
the urban Ginninderra Creek (Australian Capital
Territory) during the late 1980s and early 1990s,
Mark Lintermans (unpublished data) regularly captured
Oriental weatherloach at densities of 3ñ5 fish-
∆m)2
. The seasonal pattern observed during our
surveys is also consistent with previous surveys
(Sterba 1962; Lintermans 1993). Importantly, we note
here that Oriental weatherloach do not float when
shocked and are therefore difficult to catch relative to
other fish species. Densities of captured fish should
thus be considered minimum estimates of true densities.Thirty-six Oriental weatherloach were examined for
gut contents. Nine of these were caught during March
2000 in Jells Park pond, and all contained chironomids,
ostracods, gastropods and cladocerans. Additionally,
large numbers of oligochaete setae were
present in all nine of these fish. The remaining Oriental
weatherloach were captured during May 2000, in
Mullum Mullum and Merri creeks. Nineteen of these
fish had no identifiable invertebrates in their guts, and
the remaining eight had small numbers of chironomids
and/or mites (£18 invertebrates per fish). Twelve of the
27 fish captured during May also contained oligochaete
setae. No other material was found in Oriental
weatherloach guts during either season in quantities
that would suggest it was a food source. Additionally,
we observed that most fish caught during May had
fatty deposits around their heart, liver and gut. For fish
caught during all seasons <10% of the total number of
chironomids and ostracods were discarded because of
concerns about whether they were alive when
consumed (see Materials and methods). These results
suggest that feeding rates are much higher when water
temperature is high. Average temperatures of Dandenong
Creek, a creek near our sampling sites, was
18.6 C during the March (warm) sampling, and
11.7 C during the May (cool) sampling (http://
www.vicwaterdata.net).The mean number of macroinvertebrates in each
before sediment core ranged from five to 18. Across
all mesocosms, oligochaetes made up 59% of total
invertebrates, chironomids 31% and ostracods 10%.
Other taxa made up less than 1%. At the end of the
experiment the number of invertebrates in each core
(averaged for each mesocosm) ranged from five to 38,
with oligochaetes making up 62% of the total across
mesocosms, chironomids 13% and ostracods 25%.
Again, other taxa accounted for <1% of total
invertebrates sampled.
Oriental weatherloach densities were significantly
negatively related to changes in numbers of total
macroinvertebrates, and the high-density fish treatment
significantly reduced chironomids compared to
the low density and control treatments (Fig. 2).
Proportional change in ostracod and oligochaete
numbers was not significantly related to treatment,
although each showed a decreasing trend as fish
density increased. Macroinvertebrate dry mass was
significantly reduced as Oriental weatherloach densities
increased (anova P º 0.009, three-fish treatment
significantly lower than both control and one-fish
treatment with Tukeyís test). Total numbers of invertebrates
between before and after sampling were positively correlated in the three-fish (Pearsonís
r º 0.90) and one-fish (r º 0.57) treatments, while
there was a weak negative correlation (r º )0.15) for
the control mesocosms. This final correlation was
influenced by a low range of initial values (range of
average animals per core for each control mesocosm
º 7ñ11 vs. 5ñ18 and 5ñ17, respectively, for the
one-fish and three-fish treatments) meaning that there
was low power to detect the expected positive
correlation if it existed. The expected difference may
also have been swamped by relatively small variations
in the consistently large increases in invertebrates in
the control mesocosms. Finally, we note that although
the control mesocosms did not conform to our
expectation of positive correlations, they did clearly
show the hypothesised release from weatherloach
predation.
Nitrogen in the form of both ammonia-N and NOx,
and water turbidity, increased significantly with Oriental
weatherloach density (Fig. 3). SRP-P levels
(Fig. 3) and total phytopigment mass (P º 0.64) were
not dependent on treatment.
xdiscussion
In mesocosms designed to mimic natural conditions
Oriental weatherloach reduced population sizes of
their macroinvertebrate prey relative to fishless controls.
In addition, mesocosms with Oriental weatherloach
had higher water column nitrogen and turbidity
levels than fishless controls. These impacts were found
during cool months at Oriental weatherloach densities
known to occur in local freshwater systems. To our
knowledge this is the first study to investigate the
impacts of this species. Although there are issues
involved in extrapolating mesocosm results to natural
systems (see below), our results demonstrate that
nonindigenous populations of Oriental weatherloach
may be altering macroinvertebrate communities. This
could have many impacts, including depriving native
fish species of food resources.
Gut analysis of fish captured from Jells Park pond
confirms that, as elsewhere, Oriental weatherloach are
benthic and interstitial predators of macroinvertebrates.
The food sources available to Oriental weatherloach
in the mesocosms matched this profile, and
populations of chironomids, and of total macroinvertebrates,
were significantly reduced in treatment
mesocosms relative to fishless controls. Although
ostracod and oligochaete populations were not signi-
ficantly reduced, each showed the expected trend of
reduced populations as fish density increased. Overall,
the total number of invertebrates in control mesocosms
increased to three times its starting value over the
67 days experiment, while in the high-density tubs the
number of invertebrates declined during the same period (Fig. 2). If this magnitude of impact is also
observed in creeks and ponds we believe it would
negatively impact other organisms relying on this food
source.
The mesocosm experiment looked at a number of
indirect ecosystem effects of Oriental weatherloach
activity and found that some of these may be
important. First, we found that the treatment mesocosms
had higher turbidity relative to control mesocosms,
most likely as a result of fish foraging
behaviour. Second, Oriental weatherloach treatment
mesocosms had elevated water column NOx-N and
ammonia-N levels relative to control mesocosms. As
with turbidity, it is likely that increased mixing of
sediment with the water column is responsible for the
elevated NOx, as this mixing would release nitrogen in
this form. The elevated ammonia-N, however, is more
likely to be a result of Oriental weatherloach excretion.
In contrast to turbidity and nitrogen levels, water
column SRP-P and total phytopigment mass were not
affected by fish density.
Our mesocosm experiment has shown that, in terms
of turbidity and nitrogen levels, Oriental weatherloach
have a similar impact on water quality to carp
(Cyprinus carpio) (Breukelaar et al. 1994; King et al.
1997; Robertson et al. 1997). Robertson et al. (1997)
also showed increased algal production in the presence
of carp, but were unable to definitely explain its
cause. In our experiment algal growth was not limited
by nitrogen availability because it did not respond to
increased nitrogen levels in the treatment mesocosms.
Instead, it may have been limited by phosphorus
availability or the relatively low light conditions
caused by the season (autumn/winter) and shade
cloth.
The mesocosm experiment was conducted during
cooler months, and simulated Oriental weatherloach
densities that our field surveys found to be common
during this season. Our gut analysis results, and results
from other studies (Naruse & Oishi 1996) indicate that
Oriental weatherloach are more active and feed at a
greater rate during summer, and it is thus possible that
impacts in summer would be greater than was seen in
our experiment. However, further research will be
needed to determine how summer impacts compare
with those found by this study. In particular, it is
possible that increased invertebrate production in
summer would swamp the effects of Oriental weatherloach
feeding. This may be particularly true for
chironomids, which do not recruit during the months
that the mesocosm experiment was performed. It is
also possible that Oriental weatherloach are more
vulnerable to capture in winter because they are
concentrated in small backwaters. Again, we emphasise
the need for further research on the seasonal
behaviour and impacts of this species.
While our results suggest significant Oriental
weatherloach impacts, three caveats associated with
mesocosm studies need to be considered. First,
animals confined to mesocosms may be released
from predators and/or competitors and thus show
greater rates of feeding. For the present study, this
would lead to increased effects on invertebrate
numbers and increased effects of bioturbation.
Second, there may be fewer refugia for invertebrates
in mesocosms than in natural habitats, thus offering
fewer opportunities to escape predation. Third,
mesocosms are isolated from natural systems and
thus experience different disturbance and flow
regimes relative to natural systems. Disturbances
such as floods may swamp any impacts of Oriental
weatherloach on invertebrates, and the effect of flow
in creeks may change the pattern of impacts,
particularly in terms of turbidity and nutrients.
These effects would be less in standing waters,
where Oriental weatherloach are also commonly
found. We consider it likely that Oriental weatherloach
effects on turbidity and nutrient levels would
be important in standing waters, but the effects in
streams require more study. In any case, increasing
nitrogen levels in urban aquatic ecosystems is not
desirable. It is more difficult to interpret the
mesocosm results in terms of invertebrate populations,
but our results clearly support further investigation
of Oriental weatherloach impacts, preferably
at larger spatial scales.
The invasion of Australian freshwaters by Oriental
weatherloach is at an intermediate stage; the species is
now a permanent part of the Australian fauna, and its
range is likely to continue expanding. Although there
is some concern about this species, as evidenced by
their eradication from a stream in Queensland (Koster
et al. 2002a) and a recent management plan for the
species in the Murray Darling Basin (Koster et al.
2002b), Oriental weatherloach has not yet been
conclusively shown to have impacts in natural
systems. Our mesocosm experiment represents the
only experimental assessment of possible impacts, and
suggests that Oriental weatherloach may alter macroinvertebrate
communities and water quality in lakes
and streams. These results emphasise the need for
further research, and until more results are available
we suggest that efforts to restrict the spread of this
species continue.