xabstract
Twelve wet meadows in Dane County, Wisconsin showed vegetation patterns that correlate with hydrologic disturbance and presence of a clonal invasive grass, Phalaris arundinacea L., at two scales, 4500-m(2) (0.45 ha) "sites" and 1-m(2) plots. Sites with indicators of hydrologic disturbance had lower species richness and diversity than reference sites, and species richness, diversity, and mean coefficients of conservatism (Mean C) were inversely related to the abundance of Phalaris on sites. Within 1-m(2) plots, 5.5 +/- 0.4 (SE) species coexisted with Phalaris, while about twice as many coexisted with two widespread native graminoids: 11.5 +/- 0.3 with Carex stricta Lam. and 10.6 +/- 0.3 with Calamagrostis canadensis (Michx.) Beauv. Cover of Phalaris was approximately six times higher in plots on sites with disturbance indicators than on reference sites. Overall, plots with either Phalaris or hydrologic disturbance had 2/3 the species of plots lacking Phalaris on reference sites, as well as lower diversity and Mean C. These results suggest a strong negative effect of hydrologic disturbance or presence of Phalaris on the quantity and quality of species in a wetland. When Phalaris and disturbance indicators co-occurred, the difference was more severe. Plots with Phalaris on disturbed sites had 1/3 the species of reference plots and the lowest diversity and Mean C. Species were grouped into seven "response types" based on apparent sensitivity to the presence of Phalaris and hydrologic disturbance. Only the clonal grass Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. responded positively to the combination of Phalaris and hydrologic disturbance

xintroduction
Soil hydrologic conditions are considered
the most important factor in the establishment
and maintenance of specific types of
wetlands a9d wetland processes (Mitsch
and Gosselink 1993, Silvertown et al.
1999, Keddy 2000). The source of water
for a wetland determines both the water ·
chemistry and hydroperiod (Brinson 1993,
e.g., Hunt et al. 1999) and influences the
types of plant species that can establish and
grow there (Goslee et al. 1997, Godwin et
al. 2003, Kraemer 2003).
Urbanization causes both major and subtle
changes in the hydrologic regimes of wetlands.
Construction of stormwater sewers
or drainage ditches can increase surlace
flow irito wetlands or decrease water
table depth. Increased area of impervious
surlaces in the watershed may increase
the frequency and severity of Hooding
(Watson etal.1981,Pitt 1996).Atthesame
time, groundwater-fed wetlands can be
profoundly affected by municipal pumping.
of groundwater and diversion of recharge
(infiltration) by impervious surfaces in
urbanized areas - phenomena that often
appear to be decoupled from influences
on wetlands (Brinson 1993).
Few studies link specific hydrologic disturbances
with vegetation characteristics,
but hydrologic changes are suspected to
be responsible for the spread of some invasive
species (Galatowitsch et al. 1999).
Galatowitsch et al. (2000) found landscapescale
associations between stormwater
runoff and introduced perennials in the
prairie pothole region of Minnesota. The
introduced perennials are often undesirable
invasive species, either exotic in origin
(e.g., Lythrum salicaria L.) or possibly
hybrids of exotic and native strains (e.g.,
Typha X glauca, Phalaris arundinacea
L.).
In July of 2000, we surveyed vegetation
in three reference-wet meadows and in
nine wet meadows with visible indicators
of hydrologic disturbances (e.g., drainage
ditches, storm water basins, proximate municipal
wells) in Dane County, Wisconsin.
Our objectives were: (1) to determine if
hydrologic disturbances correlated with
patterns in the distribution and abundance
of plant species, and (2) to describe species
associations both on the scale of whole
sites (measuring 4500-m2, or 0.45 ha) and
within 1-m2 plots.
We hypothesized that lower species richness
and diversity.would occur on sites with
indicators ofhydrologic disturbances present.
Likewise, we predicted that invasive
species would correlate with low diversity
at the scale of both sites and plots. Finally,
we asked if mean coefficient of conservatism
(Mean C), a measure of fioristic
quality, was related to presence of Phalaris
arundinacea and/or disturbance.

xmethods
Twelve wet meadows were grouped into
two categories: (1) reference sites, for
which no indicators of hydrologic disturbance
were visible, and (2) sites with indicators
of hydrologic disturbance apparent
e ither within the site or in adjacent areas
(Table 1). The indicators were existing
structures, including stormwater sewer
outlets and basins, drainage ditches, and
nearby municipal wells. ·
All sites are located within the Yahara
River watershed near Madison, Wisconsin
(Figure 1). All are slightly (0.5 to 1.5 m)
above the levels of the present chain of
Yahara Lakes (Mendota, Wingra, Monona,
Waubesa; Table l).· Fine-grained glaciolacustrine
deposits from the extensive
glacial lake(s) that formed at the close of
the Pleistocene cover much of the lower
portion of the landscape; these deposits
form aquitards that encouraged wetland
formation, especially in the shallow bays
of the post-glacial Yahara Lakes. Houghton
Mucks (Typic Medisaprists) and Palms
Mucks (Terrie Medisaprists) are common
in former bays. Slightly above these and
along drainageways, lineal wetlands form
over the glacio-lacustrine deposits but do
not form histosols because they are only
intermittently saturated. Common series
include Orion (Aquic Udifluvents) and
Wacousta (Typic Haplaquolls).
Three study sites were located in the Cherokee
Marsh wetland complex north of Lake
Mendota. Originally a continuous wetland
of ca. 2000 ha, the area now suffers from
filling for an airport, agricultural drainage
ditches, and stormwater drainageways. A
50-ha core area remains unaltered except
for a drainageway (Cherokee Marsh-CM).
Along the bound~ of the undisturbed core
and the last drainage ditch, we established
side-by-side study sites with Cherokee
Ditch (CD) proximate and Cherokee Fen
(CF) distal to the ditch.
Two study sites were located in the Pheasant
Branch wetland complex at the west end
of Lake Mendota. Located at the terminus
of a natural drainageway, the Pheasant
Branch Pond (PBP) site suffered from postsettlement
sediment deposition and recent
stormwater augmentation from suburban
development. In contrast, the Pheasant
Branch Fen (PBF) site is located just below
the nose of a hill and thus escapes large
storrnwater flows.
Located at the edge of Lake Wingra, the
Wingra Marsh (WM) site is sometimes
flooded by stormwater from a nearby
golf course and surrounding residential
developments. ,Nearby city water supply
and private irrigation wells may also affect
the site. Southeast Marsh (SEM) was
once part of a connec.ted wetland complex
around Lake Wingra, but a berm protecting
a sinking housing development coupled
with increased storinwater inputs have
converted portions of it into a de facto
detention pond that can experience a one
meter fluctuation in water levels in a 24 h
period ( unpubl. data). The Arboretum Pond
(AP) is located about 1.5 m above Lake
Wingra along a natural drainageway that
receives conditioned water via a series of
detention areas.
The Nine-Springs valley drains into the
Yahara River between Lakes Monona and
Waubesa. Deep freshwater lake deposits
suggest that it was once a small, narrow
lake, but it is now an extensive peatland
with numerous large springs along its
edges. A road floats across the peat in
one area funneling all spring and storm
flow through one undersized culvert. One
study site above the road and alongside the
straightened stream (Nine-Springs Ditch
- NSD) and one below the road and a few
meters away from the ditch (Syene Road
Meadow - SRM) were chosen for contrast.
Another site (Nine-Springs Meadow
- NSM) suffers from adjacent filling and
agricultural development (ponds, ditches)
while nearby several areas escaped these
intrusions (Nine-Springs Fen - NSF).
During July 10-20, 2000, two teams
sampled each of the 12 sites with l -m2
plots using a square PVC frame. The twoperson
teams sampled 30 plots per site for
a total of 360 plots. Ten plots per site were
double-sampled by the two teams to assess
the quality of data (Kercher et al. 2003).
Plots were placed along a 90-m transect
line stretched across the approximate center
of a site. Every 3 meters a team walked
a random perpendicular distanc.e (from 1
to 25 m) away from the transect line and
laid down a plot. Half of the plots were
placed to the right of the line and half to
the left.

Within plots, all taxa present were recorded
and their abundance was estimated using
nine cover classes in a Log2 system ( <
0.5%, 0.5-1 %, 1-2%, 2-4%, 4-8%, 8-16%,
16-32%, 32-64%, and > /
64%; Gauch
1982). Data were analyzed using coverclass
midpoints. Nomenclature followed
the PLANTS Database (USDA, NRCS ·
2002).
Species richness (S), Shannon-Wiener
diversity (H') and mean coefficient of
conservatism, or Mean C (Swink and
Wilhelm 1994), were calculated for each
plot and site. Coefficients of conservatism
came from a statewide system (Bemthal
2003) where botanical experts assigned
coefficients to individual plant species
ranging'from 0 (weedy) to 10 (found only in
undegraded natural communities). Exotic
species, including i>halaris arundinacea,
were not rated and thus did not affect our
calculations of Mean C.
For analytic purposes, we divided the plots
into four categories based on presence of
the invasive grass Phalaris arundinacea
(Pa) and indicators of disturbance: (1) plate;
containing Phalaris in sites with indicators
of hydrologic disturbance (+Pa +Dist; n
= 115), (2) plots lacking Phalaris in sites
with indicators of hydrologic -disturbance
(cPa +Dist; n = 155), (3) plots containing
Phalaris in reference sites (+Pa -Dist; n =
26), and (4) plots lacking Phalaris in reference
sites (-Pa -Dist; n = 64). For each of
the 30 most frequently encountered taxa in
the 360 plots (except Phalaris), chi-square
analyses were used to test for homogeneity
of occurrence within the four categories of
plots, using a Bonferroni-corrected alpha
of 0.0017. Using both cover estimation
and presence/absence data, plots were
subjected to Bray-Curtis ordinations in
PC-Ord (McCune and Mefford 1997), with
overlays of individuaI taxa, plot species
richness (S), Shannon-Wiener diversity
(H' ), and mean coefficient of conservatism
(Mean C).
Plots were also divided into± disturbance
categories to examine the patterns of S, H',
and Mean C, for plots with and without two
other major dominant species sampled in
our study: the native sedge Care.x stricta
Lam. and the native gras~ Calamagrostis
canadensis (Michx.) Beauv. One-way
ANOVAs, two-tailed t-tests, and simple linear
regressions were performed in Minitab
(Minitab, Inc. 2000), using a = 0.05.

xresults
The survey found 116 species. Site species
richness (based on n = 30 plots) ranged
from 11 species at Nine Springs Ditch to
68 at Pheasant Branch Fen ~ site diversity
(H') ranged from 0.5 at Nine Springs
Meadow to 2.6 at Cherokee Fen; and Mean
C ranged from 3.2 at Nine Springs Di~ch
to 5.5 at Cherokee Fen (Table 2). The
nine hydrologically disturbed sites had
35.7 ± 6.0 (mean ± SE) species, which
was significantly fewer than in reference
sites (59.3 ± 4.4, t = 3.203, df = 10, P
= 0.01). Disturbed sites also had lower
diversity than reference sites (mean 1.7 ±
0.2 versus 2.4 ± 0.1, t = -2.672, df ;;;. 10,
P = 0.02), but there was no statistically
significant difference between Mean C on
disturbed and reference sites (mean 4.1 ±
0.1 vs. 4.6 ± 0.4, respectively, t = -1.66,
~! = 10, p = 0.13).
Most sites were dominated by widely
distributed native species, including Carex
stricta, Calamagrostis canadensis, the
annual forb Impatiens capensis Meerb.,
and the perennial forbs Aster puniceus L.
and Solidago spp. (Table 2). Four of the
nine disturbed sites were dominated by
Plzalaris arnndinacea, Typlza spp., and/or
Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud.,
all of which are tall; clonal perennial taxa
that are known to be invasive throughout
large areas of North America (Galatowitsch
et al. 1999; Table 2). There were moderate
to strong negative correlations between
the frequency of Phalaris on sites and site
species richness and diversity (r = -0.62
and -0.76, respectively), and there was
a moderate negative correlation between
frequency of Phalaris and site Mean C
values (r = -0.47).
Within l -m2 plots, species richness ranged
from 1 to 22 species (mean ± SE, 10.0
± 0.3, n = 360); species diversity (H')
ranged from 0 to 2.9 (mean 1.9 ± 0.04),
and Mean C ranged from 1 to 7 .8 (mean
4.6 ± 0.07). The widespread tussock sedge,
Carex stricta, was the most frequently
encountered species and had the highest
total cover summed across all 360 plots,
while Phalaris was the fifth most frequently
encountered species but had the second
highest total cover and the highest average
cover in plots ~here it occurred (Table 3).
The native bluejoint grass, Calamagrostis
canadensis, was frequently encountered,
but it h;i.d, on average, less than half the
cover of C. stricta and about one-fifth the
cover of Phalaris when present in plots
(Table.3).
The one-way ANOVAs for species richness,
H', and Mean C in the four plot
types (±Pa ±Dist) were highly significant
(F ~ 92.6 for all, df = 359, P << 0.0001;
Figure 1). Plots without Phalaris in disturbed
sites (-Pa +Dist), and plots with
Phalaris in reference sites (+Pa -Dist),
had similar moderate numbers of species,
H', and Mean C, and both plot types had
significantly fewer species, lower H', and
lower Mean C than plots without Phalaris
in reference sites. Plots with Phalaris in
disturbed sites (+Pa +Dist) had the lowest
species richness, H', and Mean C of the
four plot types (Figure 1).
When the plots were partitioned into those
in reference versus disturbed sites and those
containing or lacking ·carex stricta (±Cs
±Dist), the one-way ANOVAs for species
richness, H' , and Mean C were again all
significant (P << 0.0001; Figure 1). This
was also the case for Calamagrostis canadensis
(±Cc ±Dist). Plots that contained
C. stricta (or C. canadensis) and were in
reference sites generally had the highest
values (Figure I). Plots that contained
C. stricta (or C. canadensis) and were
in disturbed sites, or plots that lacked C.
stricta (or C. canadensis) and were in reference
sites, usually had high or moderate
values. Plots that lacked C. stricta (or C.
canadensis) and were in disturbed sites
always had the lowest species richness,
H', and Mean C (Figure 1).
Species richness within individual 1-m2
plots was significantly negatively related
to the cover of Phalaris; this was tme both
for plots in disturbed sites (r = -0.59, F =
59.8, df = 114, P << 0.0001) and for plots
in reference sites (r = -0.47, F = 6. 7, df =
25, P = 0.016), with an overall correlation
coefficient r = -0.67 (F = 110.2, df = 140,
P << 0.0001). However, the mean cover
of Phalaris was about six times higher
in plots in disturbed sites (42.4% ± 2.8,
n = 115) than in plots in reference sites
(6.9 % ± 2.5, n = 26; t = 5.86, df = 139,
P < 0.0001). Species richness also had a
significant negative relationship to cover
of Carex stricta both in plots in disturbed
sites and in plots in reference sites (overall,
r = -0.21, F = 9.94, df= 221, P < 0.002),
but mean cover of C. stricta did not differ
for plots in disturbed versus r~fereiice sites
(overall mean cover= 18.0% ± 1.3; t = -
0.07, df= 220, P = 0.95). Species richness
was unrelated to cover of Calamagrostis
· canadensis within both plots in disturbed
sites and plots in reference sites (overall, r
= 0.05, F = 0.46, df = 200, P = 0.46), and
mean cover of C. canadensis did not differ
among plots in disturbed versus reference
sites (overall mean cover = 8.1 % ± 1.0; t
= 0.47, df = 199, P = 0.64). On average,
5.5 ± 0.4 species coexisted with Phalai-is
on the 1-m2 scale, compared to 11.5 ±
0.3 for Carex stricta and 10.6 ± 0.3 for
Calamagrostis canadensis (n = 141, 222,
and 201, respectively).
The Bray-Curtis ordinations based on cover
class data and presence/absence data were
very similar (Figure 2). Although there
were no discrete clusters in the resulting
graphs, plots did tend to congregate
with others of the same type (i.e., ±Pa
±Dist; Figure 2). Using the ordination
produced with the cover data, Phalaris
and Phragmites australis had negative correlations
with Axis 1 (r = -0.88 and -0.38,
respectively), and Carex stricta, Impatiens
capensis, Calamagrostis canadensis, and
Eupatori_um maculatwn L. had the highest
positive correlations with Axis 1 (r = 0.67,
0.53, 0.48, and 0.47, respectively). Phalaris
had a moderate negative correlation with
Axis 2 (r = -0.52), while Aster puniceus,
Agrostis gig ante a Roth, Equisetum arvense
L., Poa pratensis L., Viola cucullata Ait.,
and Oligoneuron riddellii (Frank ex Riddell)
Rydb. had the highest positive correlations
with Axis 2 (r = 0.59, 0.56, 0.56,
0.49, 0.45, and 0.44, respectively). Plot
species richness, H', and Mean C were all
positively correlated with both Axis 1 (r =
0.62, 0.76, and 0.69, respectively) and Axis
2 (r = 0.64, 0.63, 0.51, respectively).
Most species showed significant deviations
from their expected abundance within the
four major plot types (±Pa, ±Dist), based on
chi-square tests of homogeneity (Table 4).
The 30 tax.a we tested could be grouped into
seven "response types," which include: (1)
taxa that were less common than expected
only in plots containing Phalaris, (2) taxa
that were less common than expected only
in plots in disturbed sites, (3) tax.a that were
more common than expected only in plots
lacking Phalaris in disturbed sites, ( 4) taxa
that were less common than expected only
in plots containing Phalaris in disturbed
sites, (5)taxa that were more common than
expected in plots containing Phalaris that
were in disturbed sites (only the clonal
invasive grass Phragmites australis fell
into this category), (6) taxa with no clear
pattern despite a significant chi-square
test, and (7) taxa with no significant pattern
(Table 4).


xdiscussion
We hypothesized that species richness and
diversity would be lower on sites with visible.
indicators of hydrologic disturbance
than on apparently undisturbed reference
sites. Likewise, we predicted that invasive
species would correlate with low diversity
on 0.45 ha "sites" and within 1-m2 plots.
Our results support both hypotheses. Disturbed
sites had lower overall species richness
and diversity, and there were negative
relationships between the abundance of the
invasive grass Phalaris arundinacea and
measures of site quality. At the l-m2 scale,
we found that plots containing Phalaris in
reference sites (+Pa-Dist) and plots lacking
Phalaris in disturbed sites (-Pa +Dist) had
roughly 2/3 the species richness of plots
that occurred in reference sites and lacked
Phalaris (-Pa -Dist). Plots that both contained
Phalaris and occurred in disturbed
sites (+Pa +Dist), however, had only 113
the species of -Pa -Dist plots. Our correlational
study suggests independent, and
possibly interactive, effects of hydrologic
disturbance and presence of Phalaris on
vegetation diversity and quality (Figure 3
and see below).
Two common native graminoids, Carex
stricta and Calamagrostis canadensis,
displayed patterns of species richness, H',
and Mean C that differed greatly from those
of Phalaris. Plots in sites that lacked indicators
of hydrologic disturbance in which
C. stricta or C. canadensis occurred had
the highest quantity and quality of taxa,
while plots in disturbed sites that lacked
either of the two native species had the
lowest values. Thus, while fewer species
and lower floristic quality are associated
with Phalaris, more species of higher
quality co-occur with C. stricta and C.
canadensis. At least in the case of Phalaris
versus C. stricta, this pattern may be due
to the greater microtopographic variability
created by C. stricta tussocks (Werner and
Zedler 2002). Further support that Phalaris
reduces plant diversity comes from management
experiments (e.g., Paveglio and
Kilbride 2000).
We asked if mean coefficient of conservatism
(Mean C), one measure of floristic
quality, was related to presence of Phalaris
and/or disturbance within our 12 wet meadows.
A closely related measure, ftoristic
quality index (FQI), has been criticized for
its subjectivity and sensitivity to differences
in sampling intensity, season, or habitat
type (Bowles et al. 2000, Francis et al.
2000, Matthews 2003). Although Mean C is
still based on the subjective assignment of
coefficients to taxa by experts, it has been
suggested that Mean C yields more intuitive
results with no hidden information and with
little effect of species richness/sampling
intensity (Rooney and Rogers 2003). In
our survey, we found that Mean C declined
with disturbance or presence of Phalaris
within 1-m2 plots, and was lowest when
disturbance and Phalaris were combined
(note that our results for Mean C were not
confounded by the presence of Phalaris,
since it was not assigned a community
coefficient). This pattern parallels those
for species richness and diversity, and we
detected a significant positive relationship
between Mean C and species richness and
diversity (r= 0.51and0.52, respectively; P
< 0.0001 for both) for plots though not for
sites (r = 0.36 and 0.46; P = 0.24 and 0.13,
respectively): Matthews (2003) likewise
found a significant positive relationship
between species richness and Mean C
for diverse wetland types censused in Illinois,
USA (r = 0.44 in that study). This
correlation may indicate concomitant but
independent declines in species richness
and quality, or it may reflect multicollinearity
of these variables.
Taxa responded in several different ways to
the presence of Phalaris and disturbance.
Some taxa (response type 1) were less
common than expected only when Plwlaris
was present (i.e., the forbs Campanula
aparinoides Pursh, Eupatorium maculatum,
and Lycopus unijiorus Michx., the
fem Thelypteris palustris Schott, the grass
Bromus ciliatus L., and mosses), suggesting
competitive exclusion of these taxa by the
taller, clonalPhalaris. Other taxa (response
type 2) were less common than expected
only in plots in sites with indicators of
hydrologic disturbance (i.e., the forbsAster
puniceus, Oligoneuron riddellii, Solidago
giganteaAit. and Viola cucullata, the grass
Glyceria striata (Lam.) A.S. Hitchc., and
the horsetail Equisetum arvense ), suggesting
the primacy of hydrologic alterations
over competition with Phalaris in influencing
the distribution of these taxa.
Most taxa had more complicated patterns.
Several (response type 3) appeared
to thrive with disturbance, as long as
Phalaris was not present (i.e., the grass
Calamagrostis canadensis, and the forbs
Epilobium coloratum Biehler, Impatiens
capensis, Lysimachia thyrsiflora L., and
Rumex orbiculatus Gray); and several
(response type 4) were as common as
expected in plots with either Phalaris or
disturbance alone, but were especially rare
in plots with both factors combined (i.e.,
the sedges Carex lasiocarpa Ehrh. and
Carex stricta, the forbs Lycopus americanus
Muhl. ex W. Bart., Pilea pumila (L.)
Gray, and Solidago canadensis L., and the
shrub Camus stolonifera Michx.). Only
Phragmites australis had positive associations
with both Phalaris and disturbance
(response type 5), and, not surprisingly,
this species is very similar to Phalaris in
that it is a tall, clonal perennial grass that
is invasive in wetlands (Galatowitsch et
al. 1999). This suggests that the two species
have similar responses to disturbed
hydro logic regimes (but see Choi and Bury
2003) and are probably in the early stages
of competition or facilitating one another
in our sites. However, Typha latifolia L.,
another tall, widespread clonal perennial
graminoid, showed no discernible tendency
to increase with disturbance and/or
Phalaris in our study.
Our survey of 12 wet meadows points to a
shift from more to less diverse communities
that are dominated by clonal invasive
species, especially Phalaris arundinacea,
due to changes that have altered the hydrologic
regimes of wetlands, a hypothesis
that is also supported by other field studies.
Owen's (1999) hydrologic study of
an urban wetland in southern Wisconsin
showed that, in less than 25 years, Phalaris
and Typha spp. (including T. latifolia, T.
angustifolia L., and T. x glauca) had in-
324 Natural Areas journal
creased their cover in the wetland; Phalaris
had expanded in areas that experienced the
largest variations in water levels, ranging
from flashy spring and summer flooding
due to urban storm water runoff to very dry
conditions during long periods of no inflow,
while Typha angustifolia had expanded in
the wettest areas. A study of wetlands in
northwestern Indiana documented Phalaris
expansion primarily into artificially drained
urban wetlands, Typha angustifolia expansion
in impounded wetlands, and invasion
of Typha litter mounds by Phragmites
australis (Choi and Bury 2003). A survey
of wetlands in the prairie pothole region
of Minnesota found positive associations
between presence of stormwater runoff
and, to a lesser extent, presence of ditches
and dominance by introduced perennials
including both Phalaris arundinacea and
Typha angustifolia (Galatowitsch et al.
2000). We found evidence in support of the
hypothesis that both surface and groundwater
alterations contribute to the spread
of invasive perennial species. Typha spp.
were not sampled with high frequency on
our sites but did dominate Cherokee Marsh,
a site that receives inputs of stormwater
runoff. Phragmites australis was likewise
infrequently sampled but was co-dominant
with Phalaris at Nine Springs Meadow, a
site with indicators of both groundwater
· (city wells, a drainage ditch) and surface
water (major road) alterations. Phalaris,
the most common invasive species in our
survey, dominated three of the 12 wet
meadows. One of these sites (Nine Springs
Meadow) has been drained, while the other
two sites had indicators of both decreased
groundwater and increased surface flow.
In sites lacking disturbance, we saw 21 %
fewer species, 11 % lower diversity, and
8% lower Mean C in plots containing
Phalaris, while in disturbed sites, we saw
52% fewer species, 18% lower diversity,
and 45 % lower Mean C in plots containing
Phalaris. Elsewhere, we suggested that hydrologic
disturbance simultaneously makes
sites more invasible and Phalaris more
aggressive (Maurer et al. 2003). Phalaris
is known to tolerate a range of hydro logic
regimes (Lefor 1987, Rice and Pinkerton
1993, Figiel et al. 1995, Owen 1999, Miller
and Zedler 2003, Kercher, unpubl. data).
Either increased surface water flow or decreased
groundwater influence could make
wet meadows more susceptible to Phalaris
invasion by reducing growth of sensitive
native species. The effect of increased
surface water has been demonstrated by
Kercher and Zedler (2004) in a mesocosm
study, which showed that floods lasting four
weeks or longer caused several sensitive
native species to decline and more tolerant
Phalaris plants to grow and spread rapidly
into the large gaps created during the dieoff
of the natives. Canopy gaps could also
increase opportunities for invasion from
seed (Lindig-Cisneros and Zedler 2002).
At the same time, nutrients carried in surface
runoff or released with lowered water
tables may favor the vegetative expansion
and growth of Phalaris over that of native
species (Green and Galatowitsch 2001,
2002; Kercher and Zedler 2004). Direct
tests of our conceptual model (Figure 3)
are underway in mesocosms, and further
research is warranted for other wetland
communities affected by both hydrologic
disturbances and invasive species.