xabstract
The spiny cladoceran (Bythotrephes longimanus)
is an invasive, predaceous zooplankter that is
expanding from Great Lakes coastal waters into inland
lakes within a northern latitudinal band. In a large,
Boundary Water lake complex (largely within Voyageurs
National Park), we use two comparisons, a
2-year spatial and a 12-year temporal, to quantify
seasonal impacts on food webs and biomass, plus a
preliminary calculation of secondary production
decline. Bythotrephes alters the seasonal biomass
pattern by severely depressing microcrustaceans during
summer and early fall, when the predator is most
abundant. Cladoceran and cyclopoid copepods suffer
the most serious population declines, although the
resistant cladoceran Holopedium is favored in spatial
comparisons. Microcrustacean biomass is reduced
40ñ60 % and secondary production declines by about
67 %. The microcrustacean community shifts towards
calanoid copepods. The decline in secondary production
is due both to summer biomass loss and to the
longer generation times of calanoid copepods (slower
turnover). The Bythotrephes ëëtop-downíí perturbation
appears to hold across small, intermediate, and largesized
lakes (i.e. appears scale-independent), and is
pronounced when Bythotrephes densities reach 20ñ40
individuals L-1. Induction tests with small cladocerans
(Bosmina) suggest that certain native prey populations
do not sense the exotic predator and are ëëblindsidedíí.
Failure of prey to deploy defenses could
explain the disproportionate community impacts in
New World versus Old World lakes.
xintroduction
There is growing awareness that freshwater communities
are more seriously threatened by the introduction
of non-indigenous species than by atmospheric
pollution, agricultural land use practices, or even
global climate change (Vitousek et al. 1996; Simberloff
and Van Holle 1999; Sala et al. 2000). In the Great Lakes region, exotic species impacts are major
and accumulative (Mills et al. 1993; Ricciardi 2006).
The spiny cladoceran (Bythotrephes longimanus) is an
invasive, predaceous zooplankter that impacts Great
Lakes assemblages and that is spreading out from
coastal waters to colonize inland lakes across a
temperature-related northern latitudinal band (Fig. 1;
Kerfoot et al. 2011). The inland region stretches from
Vermont, eastern Ontario, and New York, through
Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Manitoba.
In the first stage of New World expansion, the spiny
cladoceran invaded very large lakes, e.g. all of the
Laurentian Great Lakes by 1987 (Fig. 1; Lehman
1987; Cullis and Johnson 1988). Initial study of
Bythotrephes in the Great Lakes yielded some insights
into the speciesí colonization characteristics. For a
cladoceran, Bythotrephes carries a long, barbed caudal
appendage (Fig. 1, insert). The tail spine protects
Bythotrephes from small young-of-the year (YOY)
fish (Barnhisel 1991a, b), although larger fish can
ingest great numbers of adults (Mills et al. 1992;
Branstrator and Lehman 1996). Bythotrephes is epilimnetic
and metalimnetic, and sometimes hypolimnetic
in reservoirs during the day. There are often midsummer
density oscillations (Berg and Garton 1988;
Lehman 1991), and individuals have high energetic
demands (Lehman and Ca¥ceres 1993; Yurista et al.
2010). In the Great Lakes, Bythotrephes were
observed to depress herbivorous cladocerans such as
D. retrocurva and Bosmina (Lehman and Ca¥ceres 1993; Barbiero and Tuchman 2004). Despite the
spineís effectiveness against YOY fish (Jarnagin
et al. 2004; Compton and Kerfoot 2004), spiny
cladocerans survived under a delicate demographic
balance. Although generation times were short,
enough larger fish consumed the cladoceran that
ingestion by fish contributed an estimated 40ñ70 %
of annual mortality (Jarnagin et al. 2004; Pothoven
et al. 2007).
In the second stage of geographic expansion, after
colonizing embayments and harbors, Bythotrephes
began to invade relatively small inland lakes (Fig. 1;
MacIsaac et al. 2000, 2004; Yan et al. 2001;
Branstrator et al. 2006; Kerfoot et al. 2011). Rapid
inland expansion across the northern US states and
Canadian provinces is linked to recreational fishing.
Dispersal was promoted by snagging of tail spines on
fishing lines, anchor ropes, nets and minnow seines,
but also by use of local baitfish and inter-lake transfer
of fish. The unusual thick-shelled diapausing eggs can
pass through fish guts in viable condition (Jarnagin
et al. 2000, 2004). Inspection of fish guts (yellow
perch, cisco, alewives) documented that large numbers
of viable eggs end up in stomachs during summer
and fall (Jarnagin et al. 2004; Kerfoot et al. 2011).
Diapausing eggs that pass through fish guts may be
defecated into live wells and bait buckets, or the eggladen
fish transferred from one lake to another.
Much of the recent demographic and food-web
impact information has come from studies of relatively
small lakes: Harp Lake, Ontario (Yan and
Pawson 1997; Yan et al. 2001), Lake Michigamme,
Michigan (Jarnagin et al. 2000, 2004), and an additional
series of eastern Ontario lakes (Strecker and
Arnott 2005; Strecker et al. 2011). During the daytime,
egg-carrying adult Bythotrephes seek shelter in epilimnetic
strata between the bottom of the photic zone
and the top of the hypolimnion, reducing risk from fish
consumption. In small lakes, Bythotrephes became
most abundant in summer (July, August). In Harp
Lake, Bythotrephes caused shifts in zooplankton size
and species composition, reducing small cladoceran
density and overall species richness, while favoring
the gelatin capsule-protected cladoceran Holopedium
(Yan et al. 2002). In Harp Lake, prey species
selections were similar to those observed in Swedish
mesocosm investigations, within the predatorís natural
habitat (Wahlstrom and Westman 1999). However
in Europe, Bythotrephes generally does not have the
serious biomass and biodiversity effects observed in
North America and often co-occurs with taxa that we
see removed from northern Midwestern lakes (Straile
and Haelbich 2000; Korovchinsky 2000; Kelly et al.
2013).
Thus previous geographic knowledge comes from a
mixture of very large and relatively small lakes. Here
we use extensive spatial and temporal sampling in
Voyageurs National Park lakes to examine responses
in an inter-connected, intermediate-sized series of
lakes, to see if prior observations are scale-independent.
Our study benefits from extensive and historical
sampling before, during, and after colonization.
Moreover, the interconnected lakes resemble, in
miniature, circumstances in the Great Lakes. Initial
documentation sets the stage for even longer-term
observations. For example, because there are substantial
community biomass effects, we could examine
ëëcascading effectsíí up and down food webs. Moreover,
one might expect resting-egg ëëseed banksíí to
initially moderate effects. Despite strong depressions
of vulnerable species, populations may linger until
recruitment from ëëegg banksíí is depleted.
We report that, as in smaller lake studies,
Bythotrephes is creating major, progressive impacts
on microcrustacean assemblages. Even though the
lakes are larger in size than previous inland studies,
there are severe shifts in microcrustacean seasonal
density patterns, community composition, biomass
and secondary productivity. In addition, there are
initial indications of ëëcascading effectsíí in colonized
waters. We also observe that species appear to be
barely hanging on, at very low densities, an indication
of initial ëëseed bankíí moderation of losses. Because
there are fewer multiple stressors (no zebra or quagga
mussel colonization, fewer changes in fish stocking,
lack of phosphorus abatement) in Voyageurs National
Park waters, the studies may aid interpretation of
recently observed shifts in Laurentian Great Lakes
food webs due to increased Bythotrephes density. We
also begin to address the question of disproportionate
food-web effects between New World and Old World
food webs by including Bythotrephes in prey ëëinductioníí
experiments. Small cladocerans (Bosmina,
Eubosmina, Ceriodaphnia) typically respond to natural
predators by deploying a variety of defensives.
However, Bosmina fail to react to Bythotrephes, as if
prey individuals are incapable of sensing the presence
of the exotic predator and are ëëblind-sidedíí by its presence. Disproportionate effects of invasive predators
are often thought to derive from prey lacking the
ability to detect or respond appropriately to novel
predators, due to absence of shared evolutionary
history [i.e. prey naivete¥ hypothesis, Cox and Lima
(2006)]. Several studies report a lack of recognition of
invasive predators by native prey that lack an evolutionary
history with the predator (Shave et al. 1994;
Smith et al. 2008).
xmethods
The species is well spread across Ontario, occupying a
band with a cluster in central Ontario (Fig. 1). South of
the international boundary, the colonization stretches
into New York and Vermont. Towards the west, the
species has moved through Michigan, Wisconsin, and
into Minnesota. Expansion of Bythotrephes into the
10,000 lake district of northern Minnesota and western
Ontario along a preferred temperature band (Kerfoot
et al. 2011) places the entire northern region at great
risk. Bythotrephes appears to prefer 14ñ23 C waters
(Yurista 1999). Prolonged temperatures above
25ñ26 C can cause reproductive failure (Garton
et al. 1990; Yurista 1999), which explains the lack of
Bythotrephes colonization in southern Wisconsin,
Minnesota, and Michigan inland lakes (Kerfoot et al.
2011). The temperature regimes found in Voyageurís
lakes (Table 1), and regional boundary waters, seem
ideal for colonization. The large Voyageurs lake
complex also provides an example that falls between
small inland and exceptionally large lakes (e.g.
Laurentian Great Lakes).Voyageurs National Park is located in northern
Minnesota (Fig. 2). The Park was established in
1975 around a system of four interconnected lakes
(Kabetogama, Namakan, Rainy, Sand Point), plus
associations with Crane and Little Vermilion Lakes on
the southeastern edge, all occupied by zooplankton
that seem a mixture of glacial relic, mesotrophic lake,
and a few eutrophic bay species. The large interconnected
lakes include Rainy Lake (932 km2 surface
area), Namakan Lake (97.4 km2), Kabetogama Lake
(97.3 km2), and Sand Point Lake (34.5 km2). Crane
Lake (11.8 km2) and Little Vermilion Lake (5.2 km2)
are linked to Sand Point Lake along a southeastern
corridor and lie just outside of park boundaries. Four
of the lakes straddle the International Boundary
between Canada and the United States (heavy black
line). Portions of the large lakes and more than 30
named smaller interior lakes (ranging in size from 0.08
to 3.05 km2) comprise more than half of the parkís
total area of 883 km2.The lakes share several general limnological
features (Table 1). All five interconnected lakes are
ice-covered 5 months out of the year, and four
maintain thermal stratification during the warm
season. The exception is Kabetogama, which is
polymictic. Mean August temperatures range
between 20.8 and 22.3 C. All are soft-water lakes
(CaCO3 concentrations = 12.2ñ44.8 mg/L), with a
wide range in productivity. Rainy, Namakan, and
Sand Point have been oligotrophic since 2000,
whereas Kabetogama is mesotrophic, with shallowwater
regions \15 m deep) bordering on eutrophic.
The relatively large Black Bay region (22.6 km2;
3 m depth) of Rainy Lake is also much more
productive, bordering on eutrophic conditions. Bythotrephes
was established in Rainy, Kabetogama and
Namakan Lake by 2007. The species has since been
reported in Sand Point, Crane, and Little Vermilion
lakes, although population densities in the latter three
lakes were still quite low in 2009 (Fig. 3).
Prior to our studies, several surveys of Voyageurs
National Park established physical, chemical, and
biological properties (Table 1). Dates for four microcrustacean
surveys include an early University of
Minnesota survey (1973, 1976), Hargisí samples
(1978ñ1980), extensive investigations by the Park
and USGS personnel during 1981ñ1984, plus repeated
USGS sampling of Namakan and Rainy Lakes during
1996. Previous survey results were published in Hargis
et al. (1981) and a USGS report (USGS/BRD/ITR assemblage, including Daphnia longiremis, D. pulicaria,
D. galeata mendotae [sic], D. retrocurva, socalled
Bosmina longirostris, Eubosmina coregoni,
Chydorus sphaericus, Diaphanosoma leuchtenbergianum
(now D. birgei), Ceriodaphnia lacustris, C.
quadrangula, and Holopedium gibberum. The large,
predatory cladoceran, Leptodora kindtii, was also
frequently detected. The most commonly occurring
cyclopoid copepods were Diacyclops bicuspidatus
thomasi, Tropocyclops prasinus, Acanthocyclops vernalis,
and Mesocyclops edax. The most abundant
filter-feeding calanoid copepods were Diaptomus
ashlandi, D. sicilis, Skistodiaptomus oregonensis,
and Leptodiaptomus minutus. Large omnivorous
calanoid copepods included Epischura lacustris,
Limnocalanus macrurus, and Senecella calanoides.
Plankton samples in deeper lakes also included
occasional opossum shrimp (Mysis diluviana) and a
variety of phantom midges (Chaoborus spp.), all of
which exhibited vertical migration.
All of the large interconnected lakes had similar
zooplankton communities prior to Bythotrephes arrival
(Hargis et al. 1981; Kallemeyn et al. 2003). At
Voyageurs, we used two independent sampling comparisons
to examine food web impacts after Bythotrephes
colonization. The first we termed a Spatial
Contrast approach. During 2009ñ2010, microcrustacean
communities from Voyageursí lakes that contained
high densities of Bythotrephes (3 lakes) were
compared with lakes that contained low densities (3
lakes). The second comparison was termed a Temporal
Contrast. Here we compared pre- versus post-invasion
zooplankton communities in the three high Bythotrephes-
density lakes (Rainy, Namakan, and Kabetogama),
using long-term periodic sampling done
independently from the spatial contrast sampling.
Spatial contrast
The Spatial Contrast approach determined mean
Bythotrephes densities in each lake during
2009ñ2010 (Fig. 3). We classified three lakes (Rainy,
Kabetogama and Namakan) as ëëhigh-densityíí
(shaded bars; 24.2, 33.0, and 29.0 Bythotrephes m-3,
respectively), whereas Sand Point, Crane, and Little
Vermilion were designated ëëlow-densityíí lakes (clear
bars; 5.7, 0.3, 0.5 Bythotrephes m-3). Monthly
zooplankton samples were collected from 13 stations
(Fig. 2) during the summers of 2009 and 2010, with
sampling sites dispersed more or less equidistant
across the space of the interconnected system. Sampling
sites in the larger lakes were close to sites used
for routine, long-term bi-weekly vertical tows associated
with water quality monitoring (see Temporal
Contrast). Six stations were in Rainy Lake (including
one in the shallow, more eutrophic Black Bay), two
stations each in Namakan and Kabetogama, and one
station each in Sand Point, Crane, and Little Vermilion
Lakes. At each station, two tows were taken vertically
from bottom to surface with a single 25 cm-diameter
Wildco Plankton Net (125 lm Nitex mesh), whereas
one long tow was collected diagonally (horizontal) in
the epilimnion with a 50 cm-diameter, 350 lm mesh
Nitex net (Research Nets, Inc., Bothell, Washington).
The 350 lm net was equipped with a unidirectional
flow meter for calculating sampled water volume, and
was drawn from the thermocline to the surface. The
flow meter was checked dockside at MTU and the
towed track length in the field with a Magellen Triton
GPS meter. Samples were rinsed into 500 mL Nalgene
plastic sample jars, preserved in 10 % formalin/sucrose,
and kept in cold storage until processed. Results
from the two vertical tows were averaged. However,
horizontal large-net tows greatly improved density
estimates for large-bodied epilimnetic predators and
prey (e.g. Bythotrephes, Leptodora, Holopedium,
Daphnia mendotae, Epischura) relative to numbers
captured in smaller vertical net tows, and these values
were used for the larger-bodied taxa. In particular,
Holopedium showed a tendency for high spatial
clumping, and was best sampled with the larger,
horizontal coarse mesh tows. The Spatial Contrast net
tows were done during June, July, August and
September, producing 67 site density estimates over
the 2-year (2009ñ2010) interval.
In the laboratory, collections were stirred in a
beaker with a magnetic stirring rod, then a subsample
constituting at least 10 %of the sample by volume was
taken with a Hensen-Stempel Pipette. All microcrustaceans
belonging to cladoceran and copepod taxa
were identified following Balcer et al. (1984) and
Haney et al. (2013). Counting was done under an
Olympus dissecting microscope at 409, whereas
lengths for biomass calculations were measured at
80X, using a 2X WD38 auxiliary lens. For larger
predatory species (e.g. Bythotrephes, Leptodora,
Limnocalanus), every individual in the sample was
counted. For copepods, nauplii were counted separately and lumped into one category. Pelagic
densities for microcrustacean taxa were based on
counts, whereas length measurements were used to
estimate biomass using published length/weight
regression models (e.g., Culver et al. 1985; Manca
and Comoli 2000). Densities and biomass of microcrustacean
taxa were compared between the two sets
of lakes (high Bythotrephes density, low Bythotrephes
density) using a one-way Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) on log-transformed data. The Spatial
Contrast series captured spatial impacts at a brief
moment during a time when the Bythotrephes population
was actively expanding spatially in Voyageurs
National Park.
Taxa abundant enough to be tallied in the Spatial
Contrast series included the cladocerans Daphnia
longiremis, D. pulicaria, D. mendotae (formerly D.
galeata mendotae), D. retrocurva, Bosmina sp.,
Diaphanosoma birgei, and Holopedium gibberum.
Densities for the large, predatory cladoceran, Leptodora
kindtii, were also tabulated. Cyclopoid copepods
included Diacyclops bicuspidatus thomasi, Acanthocyclops
vernalis, Tropocyclops prasinus and Mesocyclops
edax. Filter-feeding diaptomid calanoid
copepods were lumped together into one herbivorous
category, Diaptomidae, separate from the omnivorous
large-bodied taxa, Epischura lacustris and Limnocalanus
macrurus. Dominant species of filter-feeding
diaptomid copepods included Leptodiaptomus sicilis,
Leptodiaptomus ashlandi, and Skistodiaptomus oregoninsis
in the collective category.
Temporal contrast
In the Temporal Contrast approach, we utilized a longterm
data set collected in the large lakes (Rainy,
Namakan, Kabetogama) by the National Park Service
in collaboration with the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources (Minnesota DNR) and the United
States Geological Survey (USGS). In the DNR yearly
sampling, microcrustacean plankton assemblages
were sampled at twelve sites within Voyageurs
(Fig. 2; i.e., all four large lakes; unfortunately there
was no pre-Bythotrephes sampling in Crane and Little
Vermilion Lakes) using vertical tows with a 30 cm
diameter Wildco Hensen Egg Net (153 lm Nitex
mesh). At each station, two separate vertical hauls
were taken. Each year, samples were collected
monthly from May to October. To compare pre- with
post-colonization communities, pre-invasion zooplankton
data from 2001 to 2003 were compared with
more recent, post-invasion data from 2007 to 2010 in
the high-density Bythotrephes lakes (Rainy, Namakan,
Kabetogama) during summer months (June, July, and
August). We stress that the Temporal Contrast samples
were an independent set of collections than those
used in the Spatial Contrast, although site proximity
(almost the same locations) and some time overlap
(2009ñ2010) are likely to foster close correlations.
The temporal sequence was intended to compare
differences before and after Bythotrephes arrival in the
three largest lakes during months when Bythotrephes
were present. In contrast, the Spatial Contrast had
Bythotrephes in all lakes, although with relative
ëëhighíí versus ëëlowíí densities. The Temporal Contrast
comparisons also integrated samples over a much
greater period of time, and included full vertical
(epilimnetic-hypolimnetic) profile coverage. The temporal
series included a total of 237 independent
samples for comparisons. We contrasted pre-invasion
to post-invasion species biomass using one-way
ANOVA (i.e. contrasting before and after predation
dichotomy) on log-transformed data. Logarithmic
transformation was applied to normalize data. Because
biomass calculations utilized density estimates transformed
by biomass regressions, relative differences
for density and biomass were expected to be very
similar. To judge differences in diversity, we calculated
the Shannon-Wiener Index (Hí) of diversity for
late-summer assemblages, using species categories
and density. As a check, we also ran an independent
ANOVA analysis on Sand Point Lake, a lake where
there was pre- and post-Bythotrephes sampling, but
where spiny cladocerans were in relatively low, but
rising, abundance (Fig. 3).
In past park surveys, bosminids were placed into
two categories: a small-bodied species, Bosmina
longirostris, and a slightly larger species, Eubosmina
coregoni. Although modern electrophoretic and genesequencing
studies show that the predominantly
European species B. longirostris does exist in North
America, two recently described small-bodied species,
B. liederi and B. freyii, are the usual upper Midwestern
species in larger lakes (Taylor et al. 2002; Kerfoot and
McNaught 2010). The genus Eubosmina can be
distinguished from the two smaller Bosmina species
by lateral head pore position. Eubosmina occurs as
either the larger invasive species E. coregoni, which usually lacks a tail spine (mucro), or the naturally
occurring slightly smaller species E. longispina, which
has a well-developed mucro. In our investigations,
because several species fell under the two genera, for
convenience we lumped individuals into only two
categories: Bosmina spp. and Eubosmina spp.
Principal components analysis
To help density and biomass variables conform to a
normal distribution, both were subjected to logarithmic
transformation. As mentioned earlier, in the
Spatial and Temporal Contrasts, we used a one-way
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to establish significance
levels. However, to further investigate and
display collective correlation patterns between species
densities, we applied a Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) ordination on the biomass correlation matrix to
examine cluster patterns. Factor loadings (eigenvalues)
for the Principal Components are shown in
figures for the first three orthogonal axes (eigenvectors).
Analyses utilized SYSTAT 12 (SYSTAT Software,
Inc. 2007) on a PC platform. Axes were ranked
by their eigenvalues and Scree tests indicated the
appropriate number of significant axes. Typically only
3ñ4 factors (eigenvalues) were significant, so we
plotted the first three in a 3-dimensional diagram. The
clusters aided species-by-species comparisons, so they
were included in the general treatment.
Preliminary secondary production calculations
Potential changes in ëëSecondary Productioníí were
estimated using the following model from Shuter and
Ing (1997):
log10P=Bgs º a ˛ bTgs ˛ U log10gsﬁﬁ
where P/Bgs is the ratio of ëëSecondary Productioníí to
ëëBiomassíí over the growing season for taxon categories.
In the equation, a, b, and U are constants, with
a being distinct for each of the three taxon categories
(cladocerans, cyclopoid copepods, and calanoid copepods).
Values for the constants (a, b, U) were taken
directly from Shuter and Ing (1997), derived from
numerous studies. The variables Tgs and gs refer to
daily temperature (C) over the growing season, and
the total length of the growing season (days), respectively.
We arbitrarily defined the growing season to
coincide with the locally ice-free months of May
through October, and used the average daily high
temperature for this time period (19.9 C) as Tgs. After
calculating a value for log10(P/Bgs), one can solve for P,
by plugging in the estimated Bgs, based on our biomass
estimates for each taxon category multiplied by the
length of the growing season. The obtained pre- and
post-invasion Pgs values for each zooplankton species
were summed into the broader cladoceran, cyclopoid
copepod, and calanoid copepod groupings to obtain preand
post-invasion total ëëSecondary Productioníí estimates.
Post-invasion secondary production was then
compared to pre-invasion secondary production to give
us a preliminary estimate of declines.
Laboratory induction experiments
Prior studies established that small cladocerans, like
Bosmina, undergo spine elongation and increased
body size when placed in close proximity to many
natural invertebrate predators (Kerfoot 1987; Kerfoot
and McNaught 2010). The transmitting agent may be a
chemical kairomone, since effects pass through nets
on submersed bottles (Kerfoot and McNaught 2010;
Kerfoot and Savage 2016), but may also involve
physical stimulation (Sakamoto et al. 2007). When
compared with Bythotrephes, Leptodora is similar in
its handling responses, reduces small cladocerans, and
induces spine elongation in Bosmina (McNaught et al.
2004; Kerfoot and McNaught 2010). Therefore, we
anticipated that Bythotrephes should induce spine
defenses in Bosmina.
For comparing Bosmina responses to Bythotrephes
relative to an array of natural predators, we utilized a
split clonal design (see Kerfoot 2006; Kerfoot and
McNaught 2010). Bosmina stem females were netted
(125 lm Nitex plankton net, towed vertically) from
Portage Lake, Michigan, which is connected to Lake
Superior. Individuals were transferred into finely
filtered (0.4 lm Millipore) and aged lake water
(6 month old, refrigerated Portage Lake water) in
35 mL glass shell vials. Chlamydomonas reinhardii
(U. Tex 90) was added as food each day, and medium
changed every 2ñ3 weeks. Breeding parthenogenetically,
stem females established clonal lines that grew
exponentially. After a minimum of three generations
(ca. 2 weeks) to purge maternal effects, a growing
clone was split into two vials. The split-clonal design featured several advantages: (1) control and predatorexposed
populations were genetically identical, (2)
populations initially had similar demography, and (3)
initial densities of prey (75ñ100 Bosmina/vial) were
sufficient so that predators normally did not consume
all prey during the limited time of exposure
(7ñ12 days). In the small vial (35 mL) exposures,
Bosmina liederi were tested against several known
effective predators: the calanoids Epischura lacustris
and Limnocalanus macrurus, and a suite of predatory
cyclopoid copepods (Acanthocyclops vernalis, Mesocyclops
edax), all known residents of Voyageursí
waters. For comparisons, Bythotrephes was introduced
in similar fashion as an invasive predatory
species. All the predators used in this experiment came
from either Portage Lake or from Lake Superior. More
details on experimental design, responses of Bosmina
spp. from numerous geographic locations, and reactions
to a larger variety of predators, can be found in
Kerfoot and Savage (2016).
In the ëëpredationíí treatment, one of the split
population vials received a single predator (e.g.
advanced instar cyclopoid copepod Mesocyclops
edax; calanoid copepod Epischura lacustris, small
Bythotrephes), whereas the other split population vial
served as a control. There was initial concern that
large-bodied predators might consume high numbers
of Bosmina and differentially deplete smaller instars.
For this reason, predators were not acclimated to
laboratory conditions. Moreover, confusion by large
predators in the well-lit, relatively tight quarters of the
35 mL vials usually aided survival of prey, offsetting
initial fears. However, additional concern that large
predators might deplete oxygen in the small 35 mL
vials caused us to use only immature stages of largerbodied
predators. Vial exposures were run for
7ñ12 days, after which the entire vial contents were
preserved. If predators died during the experiment,
they were replaced (less than 20 % of trials). If there
was any evidence for major size-selective depletion of
young during the exposure, the results were not
included in tests. Tests were run on multiple clones.
All Bosmina were preserved in a 5 % formalin
solution to which 40 g L-1 of sucrose were added.
Around 40 Bosmina were haphazardly removed from
each plankton sample and mounted for measurement.
Individuals were placed on a glass slide in a 50 %
glycerin-water mixture. Slides were covered with a
glass cover-slip and measurements were made under a
Leitz Wetzler compound microscope at 400X. Features
measured on all individuals included: (1) total
body length, (2) length of mucro (tail spine) from base
to tip, and (3) length of antennule (anterior spine),
measured from the proximal tooth (setae) to the distal
tip. If the antennule was curved, measurements
followed the curvature. Previous studies have established
that the distribution of spine lengths closely
resemble the normal distribution, although a positive
relationship between the standard deviation and mean
reveals an underlying log normal distribution (Kerfoot
1988). Moreover, spine length often remains nearly
constant over body size, simplifying statistical comparisons
(Kerfoot 1987; Kerfoot and McNaught 2010;
Kerfoot and Savage 2016). Here mean spine elongation
(predator treatment spine lengthócontrol length)
from multiple ëësplit-cultureíí experiments were compared
using t tests. For cross-comparisons, additional
induction tests were performed on small-bodied
Daphnia species, but these results are reported
elsewhere.
xresults
Pre-Bythotrephes pelagic microcrustacean sampling
(2001ñ2003; Table 2) revealed a diverse assemblage
of microcrustaceans (cladocerans and copepods),
initially very similar to the above previously published
accounts (e.g. Hargis et al. 1981). Some diaptomid and
cyclopoid species occur throughout the winter in
pelagic waters (e.g. Limnocalanus, Diaptomus sicilis,
Acanthocyclops), whereas the majority of microcrustacean
species emerge from diapausing eggs in spring,
progressively adding species and individuals to the
later-season communities. Extensive sampling in all
the large lakes documented a pre-Bythorephes seasonal
pattern of increasing biomass and biodiversity
from spring to summer. Some species showed a
preference for early-season cooler waters (the cladocerans
Holopedium gibberum; the cyclopoid Diacyclops),
whereas others preferred warmer summer
waters (the cladocerans Diaphanosoma, Bosmina,
Chydorus, Ceriodaphnia; the cyclopoid
Mesocyclops).Bythotrephes was first detected in 2007. Invasion by
Bythotrephes dramatically changed the overall seasonal
density patterns (Fig. 4). In Fig. 4, the summer
density pattern for Bythotrephes (solid line) is superimposed
on the pre- and post-Bythotrephes total
microcrustacean density patterns (dashed lines; example
from Namakan Lake). The seasonal timing of the
microcrustacean decline coincides with the increase in
Bythotrephes density. Severe depression of cladoceran
species extends into the fall, when diapausing eggs are
produced (Table 2). Nauplii and early immature
copepods also show significant declines in summer
and fall samples (Table 2). Since Bythotrephes does
not become abundant in the water column until late
June, the early spring pattern shows less suppression
than the summer and fall assemblages. However,
eventually we expect a carry-over in spring as
recruitment begins to show effects from a depleted
egg bank. A few species (D. pulicaria, Bosmina spp.,
Chydorus) already exhibited significant declines in
spring (Table 2).
Spatial contrast: comparison of prey in highdensity
versus low-density Bythotrephes lakes
Based on the density of Bythotrephes in 2009ñ2010,
we divided the lakes into two categories (Fig. 3), one in which Bythotrephes was relatively abundant
(24.2ñ33.0 individuals m-3; Kabetogama, Namakan,
Rainy) and the other in which Bythotrephes was
relatively scarce (0.3ñ5.7 individualsm-3; Sand Point,
Crane, Little Vermilion; see ëëMethodsíí). The spatial
comparison contrasted differences between the two
categories of lakes during 2009ñ2010. Effects on the
microcrustacean assemblage were both general and
taxon-specific.
There were major microcrustacean differences
between low- and high-density Bythotrephes lakes
(Fig. 5a; Table 3). Filter-feeding cladocerans suffered
the greatest reductions in density, with some of the
smaller-bodied species the most depressed. Significant
differences are indicated by asterisks. ANOVA (df
1/42) tests indicated that significantly reduced taxa in
high-density Bythotrephes lakes included Diaphanosoma
(F = 54.3, p = 4.3 9 10-9), Daphnia
mendotae (F = 23.6, p = 1.7 9 10-5), D. retrocurva
(F = 6.3, p = 0.02), D. longiremis (F = 8.9, p =
4.7 9 10-3), and Bosmina (F = 28.4, p = 3.6 9
10-6). Diaphanosoma fell from a density of 11.8
individuals L-1 in low-Bythotrephes lakes to a low of
0.2 individuals L-1 in high-Bythotrephes lakes.Daphnia g. mendotae fell from 11.1 individuals L-1 in
low-Bythotrephes lakes to 3.5 individuals L-1 in high-
Bythotrephes lakes. The predatory cladoceran Leptodora
was also significantly reduced, declining from
0.8 individuals L-1 in low-Bythotrephes lakes to 0.1
individuals L-1 in high-Bythotrephes lakes (F = 5.3,
p = 0.03). In the Spatial Contrast, only one cladoceran
taxon other than Bythotrephes increased in
density, and that was the cladoceran Holopedium.
Holopedium density increased significantly (F = 6.5,
p = 0.01) from 0.3 to 2.9 individuals L-1. Because of
variance due to clumping, without the long horizontal
net tows, that increase would have been difficult to
demonstrate statistically.
Among the copepods (Fig. 5a), cyclopoid taxa
generally decreased in density, whereas a few calanoid
categories increased. The cyclopoid Mesocyclops
edax decreased significantly (F = 60.9, p = 1.1 9
10-8) in density from 5.2 to 0.2 individuals L-1,
whereas Diacyclops thomasi decreased significantly
(F = 4.1, p = 0.05) in density from 9.8 to 6.4
individuals L-1. The remaining tallied cyclopoid
(Acanthocyclops vernalis) declined from 1.9 to 1.1
individuals L-1, but the decline was not significant.
Calanoid copepods (the combined category Diaptomidae;
Epischura lacustris, Limnocalanus mucrurus)
increased slightly (12ñ15 individuals L-1), but again
these changes were not significant. In contrast,
although not included as a category in Fig. 5 or in
Table 3, nauplii and young copepodites suffered a
significant decrease from 11.2 to 6.9 individuals L-1
(F = 5.5, p = 0.02). To view the relative decreases in
biomass, differences for species are plotted separately
on a logarithmic scale in Fig. 5b. The graph emphasizes
that many species were still present after
Bythotrephes colonization, yet at 1/100th their original
densities. Whether the species persisted at low levels
because of continuing recruitment from egg banks
could not be determined, but the decreases were
substantial.
Was there any evidence for reciprocity? That is,
how much biomass increase occurred versus decrease?
Holopedium increased from 0.3 % of microcrustacean
biomass in low-Bythotrephes lakes to 5.7 % in high-
Bythotrephes lakes. The Spatial Contrast recorded a
biomass increase of 4.25 lg L-1 for Holopedium (i.e.,
low-Bythotrephes lakes had only a mean biomass of
0.39 lg L-1, whereas high-Bythotrephes lakes had a mean biomass of 4.64 lg L-1). The only other
significantly increasing species, Bythotrephes, had a
biomass of 0.46 lg L-1 in high-Bythotrephes lakes,
compared to 0.02 lg L-1 in low-Bythotrephes lakes.
Combining Bythotrephes plus Holopedium biomass
gives a 4.7 lg L-1 biomass increase compared to the
total microcrustacean decrease of 54.2 lg L-1. That
is, given the significant increases and decreases, the
differences do not appear balanced, i.e. reciprocal.
However, the biomass of diaptomid copepods
increased from 28.5 to 40.3 lg L-1, a difference of
11.8 lg L-1, which could be important. That is, filterfeeding
calanoids could be replacing a portion of the
depressed filter-feeding cladocerans.
Temporal contrast
The Temporal Contrast data were derived from an
independent set of vertical plankton hauls that
extended over a much greater interval of time, from
2001 until 2010. Not surprisingly, comparison of postinvasion
with pre-invasion densities and biomass in
Kabetogama, Namakan, and Rainy Lakes also documented
differences in the microcrustacean community.
Again there were major, similar differences
among densities and biomass for different taxa (Fig. 6;
Table 4).
The long-term temporal data set documented
similar, but perhaps even more pervasive summer
changes across the zooplankton community (Fig. 6;
Table 4). Greater resolution came from the larger
number of samples, emphasis on the 3 large lakes, and
restriction to summer samples (see Methods). In
Fig. 6, biomass differences are again plotted on a
logarithmic scale. In the Temporal Contrast, again
almost all filter-feeding cladoceran species were
depressed in post-invasion samples compared to preinvasion
conditions. One-way ANOVA (df = 1/232)
documented significance (Table 4): Diaphanosoma
(F = 27.5, p = 3.6 9 10-7), Daphnia mendotae
(F = 5.6, p = 0.02), D. retrocurva (F = 8.7,
p = 3.4 9 10-3), D. pulicaria (F = 5.5, p = 0.02),
Bosmina (F = 5.5, p = 0.02), Eubosmina (F = 8.7,
p = 3.4 9 10-3), Chydorus (F = 6.5, p = 0.01), and
Ceriodaphnia (F = 5.2, p = 0.02). In the Temporal
Contrast series, two larger-bodied taxa [Leptodora
(F = 0.1, p = 0.75) and Holopedium (F = 2.6,
p = 0.11)] did not change significantly.
Among cyclopoids, Mesocyclops (F = 20.6,
p = 9.2 9 10-6) and Diacyclops (F = 8.7, p = 3.5
9 10-3) decreased significantly,whereas Tropocyclops increased significantly (F = 8.4, p = 4.1 9 10-3).
Among large-bodied hypolimetic calanoid species, the
glacial relict species Senecella calanoides (F = 6.2,
p = 0.01) decreased after Bythotrephes invasion,
although the other glacial relict, Limnocalanus macrurus,
did not. None of the other calanoid copepods
(Diaptomidae, Epischura) and the one remaining
cyclopoid (Acanthocyclops; F = 1.0, p = 0.31) had
significant differences. However, again nauplii and
early copepodites decreased significantly in biomass
from 5.0 to 3.8 lg L-1 (F = 3.8; p = 0.02). Seasonal
comparisons (summer, fall) of nauplii and early copepodites
were also significant (Table 2). ANOVA was
run separately on Sand Point Lake, to check pre-2007
versus post-2007 densities in a lake where Bythotrephes
were at low, but increasing, densities (Table 3). Densities
for cladoceran taxa were slightly lower, but not
significant (F = 2.62, p = 0.11).
As for reciprocal responses in biomass, if overall
gains are compared to losses, gains amounted to only a
2.1 lg L-1 gain versus a 84.1 lg L-1 loss. Although
species responses were very similar to the Spatial
Contrast, calanoid copepods here posted a 8.7 lg L-1
decline in total biomass. Thus in this comparison, there
was even less evidence for filter-feeding calanoids
increasing to fill a gap left by depressed filter-feeding
cladocerans, and strong evidence that both cyclopoids
and calanoids were mutually depressed. A Principal Components Analysis (PCA) of the
correlation matrix of speciesí biomass, run on Spatial
Contrast and Temporal Contrast data sets, helped
clarify speciesí responses. A factor loadings plot of
microcrustacean responses for the Spatial Contrast
data is shown in Fig. 7a. Of twelve variables (corresponding
to the twelve speciesí categories), only four
latent roots (eigenvalues) fell above 1.00 (1 = 5.14,
2 = 1.77, 3 = 1.63, 4 = 1.22; where 1.00 is a random
spread). The total variance explained in the Spatial
Contrast PCA analysis was high (71.2 % Variance).
Factor 1 was by far the most important axis (42.9 %
Variance), weighted primarily by strong positive and
negative biomass shifts. There was a clear cluster of
filter-feeding cladocerans (Diaphanosoma, Daphnia,
Bosmina), omnivorus copepods (Mesocyclops, Diacyclops),
and one predatory cladoceran (Leptodora) that
represent taxa strongly reduced in density by Bythotrephes.
Along the opposite axis direction of Factor 1,
there were strong loadings for the two species
(Bythotrephes, Holopedium) that show positive
increases in density. Between the two extreme clusters
lie two calanoid copepods with weaker positive
density responses (Epischura, Diaptomidae), and
two additional copepods with weak density declines
(Acanthocyclops, Limnocalanus). Factors 2 and 3
more strongly separated out the latter two clusters, the
first two positive and the last two more strongly
negative. Recall that Bythotrephes is largely epilimnetic,
whereas the latter clusters with hypolimnetic
species (some Diaptomidae, Limnocalanus) could be
illustrating weak, independent fluctuations.
A 3-dimensional PCA plot for the summer-season,
Temporal Contrast correlation matrix was similar
(Fig. 7b), but explained less total variance, about
50 % (49.7 %). Again, positive and negative biomass
responses dominated clustering. The first (25.5 %
variance) and third (10.4 % variance) factors separated
species depressed by Bythotrephes (a cluster of
cladocerans Diaphanosoma, Bosmina, Chydorus,
Daphnia retrocurva, D. mendotae; D. pulicaria; the
copepods Mesocyclops edax and Diacyclops), whereas
the opposite extreme along the axis clusters species
showing biomass increases associated with Bythotrephes
(Tropocyclops, and Epischura). The third
cluster contained Scenecella and Limnocalanus, both
cold-water, hypolimnetic calanoid copepods. Neither
of the latter species occurs directly with Bythotrephes
in epilimnetic waters, thus the latter correlations may
again represent independent effects.
Density shifts in spring-fall seasonal patterns
Comparing pre- with post-Bythotrephes assemblages in
the larger lakes (Fig. 8), the late summer cladoceran
peak that was so characteristic of Kabetogama,
Namakan, and Rainy Lakes prior to Bythotrephes
completely disappeared. Using Rainy Lake as an
example, the pre-Bythotrephes pattern of low total
zooplankton density in spring (e.g. 5ñ20 organisms
L-1) was followed by a late-summer to early fall
maximum density peak (60ñ150 organisms L-1). After
Bythotrephes, summer and early fall densities fell
below 20 organisms L-1. All three large lakes showed
similar biomass shifts. After Bythotrephes colonization,
the late-season reduction in total zooplankton density
was so pronounced that the relative seasonal pattern
reversed. Zooplankton in Bythotrephes lakes were now
more abundant in spring (15ñ60 organisms L-1) than in
summer (5ñ20 organisms L-1).
Biomass, secondary production, and diversity
comparisons
In the Spatial Contrast, biomass and diversity were
influenced by Bythotrephes abundance (Fig. 9;
Table 3). In low-density Bythotrephes lakes, the
biomass of microcrustaceans averaged
135.6 ñ 6.2 lg L-1. Of that total, cladocerans
amounted to 60.6 ± 9.5 lg L-1 (45 %) and copepods
75 ± 4.4 lg L-1 (55 %). Within high-Bythotrephes
lakes, total biomass fell to 81.4 lg L-1. Of that total,
cladocerans declined to a biomass of only
14.2 ± 1.1 lg/L (17 %), whereas copepods made up
a biomass of 67.3 ± 6.4 lg/L (83 %). Cladocerans
and certain species of cyclopoid copepods were
reduced, as the assemblage moved relatively towards
calanoid copepods. For late summer, the Shannon-
Wiener Index (Hí) of diversity was 1.98 in low-density
Bythotrephes lakes compared to 1.22 in high-density
Bythotrephes lakes (t test; p = 0.035*). Reduced
density of cladoceran and copepod taxa contributed
to the decline in the index.
In the Temporal Contrast series (Fig. 9; Table 4),
biomass plots again emphasize the severe losses among cladoceran species, but also accumulative
losses in copepod species. Pre-invasion total biomass
was 142.9 lg L-1, of which 67.6 lg L-1 (47 %) was
cladoceran and 75 lg L-1 (52 %) was copepod, very
close to the low-density Spatial Contrast tallies. In
post-Bythotrephes samples, total mean biomass was
reduced to 59 ± 1.2 lg L-1 (60 % reduction), with a
corresponding 12 ± 0.7 lg L-1 (82 % reduction) for
cladoceran biomass and 47 ± 2.6 lg L-1 (38 %
reduction) for copepod biomass. After Bythotrephes,
cladocerans made up only 20.5 % of the microcrustacean
biomass, whereas copepods made up 79.5 % of
the microcrustacean biomass. Again, on a relative
basis the assemblage moved strongly towards calanoid
copepods. Mid-summer diversity also declined as the
Shannon-Weiner Index of diversity fell from 2.26 to
1.81 (t test; p = 0.015*).
As discussed in the Methods, changes in secondary
production were estimated using the following model
from Shuter and Ing (1997): log10(P/Bgs) =
a ? b(Tgs) ? U(log10(gs)), where P/Bgs is the ratio
of secondary production (P) to biomass (B) over the
growing season for a specific taxon (i.e. cladocerans,
cyclopoid copepods, or calanoid copepods), a, b, and
U are constants, with a being distinct for each of the
three taxa (cladocerans, -1.725; cyclopoid copepods,
-1.766; and calanoid copepods, -2.458). Corresponding
estimates for B were: cladocerans 0.044;
cyclopoids, 0.040, and calanoids 0.050). The variables
Tgs and gs refer to daily temperature (C) over the
growing season, and the total length of the growing
season (days), respectively. The growing season was
estimated as 215 days. Annual production was the
product of three distinct variables: the average daily
weight-specific production rate, the average biomass
over the growing season, and the length of the growing
season. Pre-invasion production for all microcrustaceans
(cladoceran, cyclopoid, and calanoid taxa)
was estimated at 744 g/m3/year, whereas post-invasion
production was estimated at 245 g/m3/year. The
difference amounted to a reduction of 67 %. The
pronounced production decline was largely
attributable to serious biomass losses (B) during the
warm summer months of cladoceran taxa plus the
longer lifespans of calanoid and cyclopoid copepods
relative to cladocerans. To underscore how changing
community differences influence production values,
median P/Bgs values for cladocerans and calanoids
from Shuter and Ing (1997) were estimated as 0.16 and
0.04, respectively, indicating a four-fold difference
between cladocerans and calanoids.
Laboratory induction experiments
Tests with co-occurring natural predators showed that
spines responded strongest to the calanoid copepod
Epischura and to an assortment of predatory calanoid
copepod and cyclopoid copepods know to commonly
co-occur with, and be effective predators on, Bosmina.
Responses were greatest to Epischura, although
increases in mucro (posterior spine) and antennule
(anterior spine) lengths were intermediate in a suite of
cyclopoid and calanoid copepods (Limnocalanus,
Mesocyclops, Acanthocyclops). When mean responses
(Fig. 10) are plotted, Bosmina failed to respond
significantly in mucro and antennule length to the
exotic species Bythotrephes (mucro df = 1121;
F = 0.162, p = 0.69; antennules df = 1121, F =
2.83, p = 0.10). Whereas these preliminary experiments
tested only Bosmina liederi, they clearly show
that this small cladoceran is not enlarging defensive
spines against the invasive Bythotrephes, increasing
its susceptibility to predation. The results suggest that
some prey species may not perceive the predatorís
presence and are ëëblind-sidedíí by the predator.
xdiscussion
Because of its size, the Voyageurs Park study allowed
for two separate comparisons, a spatial and a temporal.
Results of the two comparisons were basically similar,
i.e. severe depression of summer cladoceran populations
and certain cyclopoid taxa in summer and early
fall. As compared to other small and large lake studies,
we clearly show that effects are large enough to
strongly influence basic seasonal patterns of microcrustacean
biomass and secondary productivity. Typically
early spring assemblages of calanoid and
cyclopoid copepods transition into more dense summer
assemblages of mixed copepods and cladocerans.
Bythotrephes not only halved normal summer densities,
it reversed the seasonal density pattern, severely
reducing late season cladoceran density and biomass.
Summer biodiversity was decreased, as lake assemblages
were pushed more towards a mixture of
calanoid copepod species.(ëëlow-densityíí versus ëëhigh densityíí) involved clustering
Crane Lake (0.3 Bythotrephes/m3) and Little
Vermillion Lake (0.5 individuals/m3) together with
Sand Point Lake (5.7 individuals/m3). The ëëhighdensityíí
lakes featured similar, high densities (Rainy,
Kabetogama, Namakan; 24ñ33 Bythotrephes/m3). In
addition, the large lakes were more closely connected
relative to geographic distribution and water
exchange, factors which probably contributed to
similar high Bythotrephes densities. Some workers
argue that Bythotrephes effects are evident at densities
as low as 2ñ3 Bythotrephes/m3 (Boudreau and Yan
2003). A separate cross-comparison between Sand
Point Lake and the other two low-density lakes did
show weak, but significant, effects (45 % reduction in
cladoceran densities; ANOVA, F = 5.84, p = 0.018,
F crit = 3.99). The weak effects, even at low densities,
probably contribute to the reduced differences in
the Spatial Contrast comparison relative to the
Temporal Contrast result.
Whereas there was substantial (40ñ60 %) loss of
summer standing zooplankton biomass in Voyageurs,
there was an even greater reduction in secondary
production (67 % decline) for three reasons: (1)
serious reduction of summer-fall biomass, (2) loss of
biomass during the warm season of the year (influencing
P/B ratio), and (3) a shift of the community
towards calanoid copepods that have longer generation
times (slower turnover) than cladoceran assemblages.
Cladocerans are generally considered much
more productive than copepods, about four times more
productive (P/B ratios: cladocerans 0.16, cyclopoid
copepods 0.10; calanoid copepods 0.04; Shuter and
Ing 1997). Cladocerans also have greater estimated
filter-feeding rates for algae (Peters and Downing
1984), raising intriguing questions of cascading
trophic effects up and down food webs. The decline
in secondary production indicates a loss of energy
available to higher trophic levels, one that may have
cascading impacts on small planktivorous fish. Staples
et al. (in prep) found growth rates of young-of-the-year
yellow perch, for which Daphnia are a major dietary
source during summer, to be reduced in both Rainy
and Kabetogama lakes after the Bythotrephes invasion.
Since yellow perch are an important prey item in
these lakes, the observed decrease in growth rates
could also affect piscivorous fish and birds as well.
The substantial decline in zooplankton biomass,
and especially cladoceran filtration, in Voyageurs also Decreases were sometimes less in the Spatial
Contrast than in the Temporal Contrast comparisons,
probably because Bythotrephes were present in all
Spatial Contrast lakes, although at different relative
densities, and there was the issue of water exchange
between lakes. In comparison, the Temporal Contrast
involved a simple 100 % before-after comparison in
the large lakes. The Spatial Contrast dichotomy sets up a test for grazing release of phytoplankton
populations. Under conditions of abrupt grazer
decline, we should expect an increase in phytoplankton
biomass, especially under more productive (eutrophic,
mesotrophic) conditions. If biomass
perturbations are severe in lakes that differ in productivity,
the top-down effects should allow for a
convenient test of the ëëtrophic cascadeíí hypothesis
relative to bottom-up effects (Carpenter et al. 1985). In
this regard, early comparisons of Bythotrephes invasion
in oligotrophic Lake Michigan, did not associate
cladoceran decrease with phytoplankton increase
(Lehman 1988; Lehman and Ca¥ceres 1993). A weak
to nonexistent cascade effect was also reported by
Strecker et al. (2011) for geographic comparison of 22
Canadian Shield lakes, following cladoceran depression
by Bythotrephes. Productivity in those Canadian
lakes was again very low, so that algae may be limited
more by nutrient concentrations (bottom-up) than by
grazing (top-down). Oligotrophic lakes are less likely
to show top-down effects at lower trophic levels
because of strong counter bottom-up forces (Leibold
et al. 1997; Jeppesen et al. 2003). That is, grazers are
more food-limited than predator-limited, so that
release from predation does not result in a major
response. In experimental mesocosms, increases in
chlorophyll (phytoplankton biomass) in the presence
of Bythotrephes, consistent with trophic cascades,
have been observed (Strecker and Arnott 2005). An
intensive study of Kabetogama Lake, the most
productive of the Voyageursí lakes, conducted during
2008ñ2009, provided some evidence for increases in
Chl a concentrations and primary productivity compared
to earlier measurements (Chrisensen et al.
2011), yet a direct connection to Bythotrephes presence
has not yet been established.
In our studies, the primary mechanism of microcrustacean
biomass depression seems to come through
direct consumption of zooplankton species (Fig. 11).
Spatial comparisons showed that most small cladoceran
populations (D. retrocurva, Bosmina, Ceriodaphnia,
Chydorus) were severely depressed in
summer and early fall, when Bythotrephes was most
abundant. Larger Daphnia mendotae showed only
modest reductions, and persisted in the large lake
complex. Daphnia mendotae has the ability to migrate
into hypolimnetic waters, away from epilimnetic
Bythotrephes, and this trait undoubtedly aids its
survival in other large lakes (e.g. Lake Michigan;
Lehman and Ca¥ceres 1993; Pangle et al. 2007).Springtime abundances of cladocerans are strongly
associated with Bythotrephes abundance (Young et al.
2011). However, the escape response of D. mendotae
to Bythotrephes is also fairly effective (Pichlova-
Ptacnikova and Vanderploeg 2011). It is intriguing
that D. mendotae in the Laurentian Great Lakes
contain D. galeata genes (Kerfoot and Weider 2004),
which might account for some of the superior evasive
traits (Bourdeau et al. 2013). Although not a smallbodied
cladoceran, Daphnia pulicaria was severely
reduced to one tenth of its former abundance. Severe
reduction of D. pulicaria was also noted when
Bythotrephes invaded Lake Michigan (Lehman and
Ca¥ceres 1993; Schulz and Yurista 1999). The large
cladoceran Holopedium was exceptional in that it
benefited from Bythotrephes presence in the Spatial
Contrast data from Voyageurs, similar to the circumstance
reported from Harp Lake (Yan and Pawson
1997; Yan et al. 2002). Holopedium is protected by
virtue of being enclosed in a gelatinous sheath, which
is recognized as an effective deterrent against
invertebrate predators (Stenson 1973, 1987; OíBrien
et al. 1979). Holopedium probably also benefited from
reduced competition, as other cladocerans were driven
to low densities.
Responses of individual copepod genera to Bythotrephes
appeared more complex, probably operating
through a combination of direct and indirect pathways
(Fig. 11). In both the spatial and temporal comparisons,
naupliar stages of copepods were reduced.
Bythotrephes probably ingested cyclopoid nauplii as
an important part of their diet, a circumstance noted by
Nauwerck (1993), in Lake Huron enclosure experiments
by Vanderploeg et al. (1993), and in Harp Lake
enclosure studies by Dumitru et al. (2001). The latter
should not be surprising, as naupliar stages appear to
be vulnerable to Bythotrephes (Schulz and Yurista
1999), although copepodid and adult stages of
calanoid and cyclopoid species possess better evasive
swimming skills than cladocerans (Kerfoot et al. 1980;
Schulz and Yurista 1999; Bowers and Vanderploeg
1982). Several omnivorous copepods suffered density
declines. Mesocyclops was strongly depressed in both
the spatial and temporal comparisons, whereas Diacyclops
and Acanthocyclops were depressed marginally
in the spatial comparison, and strongly in the
temporal analysis. Adult cyclopoid copepods are
rarely found in the diets of Bythotrephes (Lehman
and Branstrator 1995; Schulz and Yurista 1999;
Yurista et al. 2010). The major decreases of Mesocyclops,
Diacyclops, and Acanthocyclops were probably
indirect, a consequence of omnivorous copepodid to
adult stages competing for prey items (small cladocerans
and rotifers) depleted by Bythotrephes. Hence
in our hypothesized food web (Fig. 11), we have
Bythotrephes both directly and indirectly impacting
cyclopoid copepods.
The observed responses in Voyageurs also resemble
results from published mesocosm experiments.
Strecker and Arnott (2005) found reductions in small
cladocerans (Bosmina, Eubosmina), cyclopoid copepods
and calanoid copepods, and again increases in
Holopedium. Biomass and biodiversity repercussions
were greatest in the initially most diverse community,
counter to their initial expectations that high biodiversity
in natural communities protects against consumer
impacts from invasives.
We emphasize long-term concern about progressive,
accumulative effects of Bythotrephes presence.
In particular, prolonged contact with cladoceran prey in late summer and early fall leads to severe prey
population declines during the prime period of
diapause egg production, a condition that, if not
reversed, will eventually lead to failure of spring egg
hatching (recruitment). Although spring recruitment
reduction appears evident in only a few species
(Table 2; D. pulicaria; Bosmina; Chydorus), we
suggest that egg bank depletion over time requires
study and may contribute to long-term progressive
negative effects.
In Europe, Bythotrephes often co-exists with the
very array of species suppressed in North American
Lakes. For example, in Lake Constance, Bythotrephes
co-exists with two Daphnia species, two Bosmina
species, Eudiaptomus gracilis, three cyclopoid copepod
species, and the predatory cladoceran Leptodora
kindtii (Straile and Haelbich 2000). Why does the
spiny cladoceran, an invasive species, have such a
widespread effect on North American resident assemblages,
but not a comparable effect on European
assemblages of similar composition? We would argue
that natural selection and evolution of defensive
mechanisms in prey species over time is a key
response circumvented by Bythotrephes (for natural
responses to Epischura and Leptodora, see Kerfoot
and McNaught 2010). An upcoming article (Kerfoot
and Savage 2016) discusses 55 split-clone experiments
with three small prey species and 12 different
predators from three locations in North America and
three in Europe. The study shows that prey ëëcountermeasuresíí
are common in pelagic food-webs. We
would argue that when a prey species fails to increase
defenses to an efficient predator, something is seriously
wrong. Although our example is admittedly only
one taxon (Bosmina), we suggest that many New
World zooplankton species are blind-sided, i.e. they
simply do not recognize the presence of Bythotrephes
in the water column and do not deploy natural
behavioral (vertical migration) or morphological
(body size, spines) defenses, the kinds of resistant
traits that allow potentially vulnerable prey to co-exist
with predators in natural assemblages.
Interpretations for Great Lakes communities
Because of multiple stressors, unraveling impacts of
invasive species on Laurentian Great Lakes pelagic
communities, the original source of Bythotrephes
before its inland spread, poses problems. Factors such
as other exotic species (quagga and zebra mussels),
changes in fish stocking, or trends in nutrient loading
(phosphate abatement), all complicate interpretations
of top-down and bottom-up effects in the Laurentian
Great Lakes (Bunnell et al. 2014). Another consideration
is scale, for the enormous size and interconnected
hydrodynamic nature of the Great Lakes
creates conditions more suitable for metapopulation
analysis. Yet there is a growing sense of urgency as
planktonic biodiversity is related to lake size, and
nowhere are there are there as many pelagic freshwater
zooplankton species as in the Great Lakes (Dodson
1992; Kerfoot et al. 2001). The Voyageurs Lake
system is also a large lake interconnected system, with
relatively high species diversity, yet is not as complicated
in time or space with ancillary issues (mussel
introductions, fish or nutrient perturbations). Voyageurs
could provide insight into how Bythotrephes
perturbations now are influencing Laurentian Great
Lakes zooplankton communities or will be influencing
Lake Champlain. Recent collapse in alewife populations
in the Great Lakes released Bythotrephes from
top-down limitation (Jarnagin et al. 2004; Pothoven
et al. 2007; Pothoven and Madenjian 2008), initiating
increased Bythotrephes densities and a second round
of microcrustacean community responses.
The responses to Bythotrephesí predation seem
complex, but make sense as a simple top-down
interaction. Bythotrephesí position in the lakeís food
web is illustrated in Fig. 11. The spiny cladoceran is
consumed by planktivorous fish, and preys directly on
cladocerans and copepod nauplii (ëëdirect effectíí).
However, because omnivorous copepods also draw
from the small-bodied cladoceran pool, there could
also be an ëëindirect effectíí upon cyclopoid densities.
After colonization in the mid-1980s, Bythotrephes
rose to densities in Lake Michigan and Huron of 20ñ80
individuals m-3 by 1988ñ1998, then declined to 5ñ15
individuals m-3 in 1999. Initial impacts on zooplankton
communities in Lakes Superior, Huron, and
Michigan included declines in the following species:
Leptodora kindtii, Daphnia pulicaria, Daphnia retrocurva,
Eubosmina coregoni, and Mesocyclops edax,
i.e., very similar to changes seen in Voyageurs. In the
middle and eastern basins of Lake Erie, the list
included two additional depressed taxa: Daphnia
mendotae and Diaphanosoma birgei, again similar to
changes observed in Voyageurs. Daphnia mendotae
experienced an initial decline in Lakes Michigan and Huron (Lehman and Ca¥ceres 1993), but subsequently
increased to pre-Bythotrephes levels or above (Barbiero
and Tuchman 2004). Again, there are similarities
as D. mendotae seems to persist in Voyageurs. Since
alewife collapse in Lake Ontario and subsequent
Bythotrephes increase, Leptodora kindtii, Daphnia
retrocurva, Bosmina and Eubosmina, Diaphanosoma
birgei, and Mesocyclops edax have all seriously
declined, whereas Holopedium gibberum has dramatically
increased (Barbiero, personal communication),
again very close to changes observed in Voyageurs.
Recent reductions of cyclopoid copepod species
(Mesocyclops, Acanthocyclops, Diacyclops) in Lakes
Michigan, Huron, and Ontario, also suggest the longterm
trends seen in Voyageurs lakes. The cyclopoid
collapses in the Laurentian Great Lakes were initially
difficult to interpret (Kerfoot et al. 2010). However,
the observed changes in the Laurentian Great Lakes so
closely resemble modifications observed in Voyageurs
assemblages following introduction of Bythotrephes,
that they are interpretable as similar top-down direct
and indirect effects, superimposed upon declining
productivity (bottom-up effects) associated with
quagga and zebra mussels. All these observations
suggest that the microcrustacean declines recently
observed in the Laurentian Great Lakes are not
necessarily connected to the bottom-up declines in
productivity brought about by mussels, but are more
closely related to a secondary collapse of planktivorous
fish density, one that has created a series of
transitory perturbations coursing through the foodweb
system in top-down fashion. At the moment,
Laurentian Great Lakes assemblages also seem to be
moving towards a set of calanoid copepods, Daphnia
mendotae, and the resistant cladoceran Holopedium,
again much as seen in Voyageurs National Park.