xabstract
An invasive Eurasian fish, the round goby Neogobius melanostomus, has recently spread from the Great Lakes
into the St. Lawrence River. We quantified prey preferences of this benthivore and determined whether its
predatory impacts on molluscs in the river are similar to those in the Great Lakes. We measured the size
structure of gastropods and dreissenid mussels at 13 St. Lawrence River sites where round goby densities ranged
from 0 to 6 m−2. For four of these sites, data were available for multiple years before and after invasion.
Contrary to studies in the Great Lakes, there were no consistent effects of round goby density on the size
structure of dreissenids, although there was an ontogenetic diet shift toward dreissenids. However, the abundance
and richness of small gastropods (≤14 mm) was negatively correlated with round goby density across
all sites, and declined over time at three of four sites sampled before and after invasion. Median gastropod
size also declined across sites with increasing round goby density. Gastropods (as well as chironomid larvae,
caddisfly larvae, and ostracods) were consistently among the most preferred prey items consumed by gobies,
whereas dreissenids (as well as leeches and freshwater mites) were consistently avoided. These results indicate
the major role of the round goby in structuring gastropod populations in the St. Lawrence River, and
highlight large-scale spatial variation in its predatory impact on dreissenid populations.

xintroduction
The round goby (Neogobius melanostomus), a benthivorous fish
native to the Black and Caspian Seas region, was discovered in the
St. Clair River in 1990 (Jude et al., 1992) and subsequently spread
throughout the Great Lakes basin within 5 years (Charlebois et al.,
2001). The species was likely introduced in ballast water released
by transoceanic vessels (Corkum et al., 2004). Its range extension
into the upper St. Lawrence River has occurred slowly, as it was not
detected at Cornwall, Ontario until 2004 (Hickey and Fowlie, 2005).
A conspicuous impact of round goby invasion in the Great Lakes
has been a negative effect on macroinvertebrate communities
(Barton et al., 2005; Ghedotti et al., 1995; Krakowiak and Pennuto,
2008; Kuhns and Berg, 1999; Lederer et al., 2006, 2008). Round gobies
consume a broad variety of benthic macroinvertebrates, particularly
molluscs, but dreissenid mussels (the zebra mussel Dreissena 
polymorpha and the quagga mussel Dreissena bugensis) frequently
compose the largest proportion of their diet (Barton et al., 2005;
Rakauskas et al., 2008; Ray and Corkum, 1997). The relative importance
of different prey items varies with round goby size, habitat conditions,
season, and time since invasion (French and Jude, 2001;
Janssen and Jude, 2001; Jude et al., 1995; Raby et al., 2010). Round
goby diet appears to vary across the Great Lakes, reflecting their flexible
and opportunistic feeding habits. Indeed, round gobies exploit a
wide variety of habitat types within the Great Lakes basin, from
stream environments where their diet is composed almost entirely
of aquatic insects (Carman et al., 2006; Pennuto et al., 2010; Phillips
et al., 2003) to profundal zones of Lakes Ontario and Huron, where
they primarily consume molluscs and crustaceans (Schaeffer et al.,
2005; Walsh et al., 2007).
Several studies have investigated round goby predation on dreissenids
and some have attempted to relate these prey preferences to
observed changes in the size structure of dreissenid populations. In
the Great Lakes, round gobies generally reach maximum lengths of
~150–180 mm. An ontogenetic shift toward a predominantly
dreissenid-based diet occurs at lengths of 60–80 mm (Barton et al.,
2005; French and Jude, 2001; Janssen and Jude, 2001; Jude et al.,
1995; Ray and Corkum, 1997), although fish as small as 40–50 mm
may consume dreissenids (Djuricich and Janssen, 2001; Lederer
et al., 2006; Taraborelli and Schaner, 2002). The maximum size of
dreissenids consumed is limited by the gape size of the fish and
ranges from 10 to 20 mm with a mean of 14 mm across field and
laboratory studies from the Great Lakes region (Clark, 2007; Djuricich
and Janssen, 2001; Ghedotti et al., 1995; Jude et al., 1995; Ray and
Corkum, 1997; Taraborelli and Schaner, 2002; Thomas, 1997).
Studies that have examined the impacts of round gobies on dreissenid
size distributions generally record larger effects on the smallest
mussels. In nearshore eastern Lake Erie, the size distribution of quagga
mussels changed through time as round goby density increased
from 6 m−2 in 2001 to 14 m−2 in later years; over this time period,
there was a decline in the abundance of mussels of 3–15 mm length
(Barton et al., 2005). A subsequent lakewide survey in 2002 found
very low abundances of dreissenids in the 3–12 mm range, in combination
with an increase in the average size of mature mussels, likely
due to round goby predation (Patterson et al., 2005). In nearshore
Lake Ontario, Wilson et al. (2006) found that the proportion of
young-of-the-year quagga mussels (≤10 mm) was negatively related
to round goby abundance. In the Cheboygan River, Michigan, the size
distribution of dreissenids peaked at 14–17 mm, while that in round
goby GI tracts peaked at 8–11 mm (Clark, 2007). Similarly, in the
Bay of Quinte, Lake Ontario, dreissenid size distribution peaked at
12–16 mm, while that in round goby GI tracts peaked at 8–9mm
(Taraborelli and Schaner, 2002). These studies suggest a tendency
for gobies to preferentially remove smaller mussels and thus alter
mussel size distributions in the field. More recently, Andraso et al.
(2011) found that round gobies in Presque Isle Bay, Lake Erie, preferentially
selected 8–11 mm dreissenids for consumption.
The work reported here complements a field survey conducted in
the upper St. Lawrence River that aimed to investigate impacts of
round gobies on the entire macroinvertebrate community (Kipp and
Ricciardi, in press). Among other impacts, the field survey found significant
negative relationships between the biomass of gastropods
and round gobies, and no significant relationships between the biomass
of dreissenids and round gobies — which is surprising in view
of impacts reported from the Great Lakes. Based on the premise that
impacts on dreissenids in the St. Lawrence might be limited to smaller
molluscs, we examined differential predation by round gobies on the
size distribution of molluscs in the field. Thus, our study linked spatial
and temporal patterns of gastropod and dreissenid size structure on
cobble substrates to the diets of gobies at multiple sites. We hypothesized
that dreissenids and gastropods would rank among the most
preferred prey items in round goby diets (i.e. these taxa would comprise
a larger proportion of the diet relative to their proportional
availability in the field; Ivlev, 1961). We predicted that 1) the size,
abundance, and proportion of dreissenids and gastropods consumed
by gobies would increase with fish total length; and 2) dreissenid
and gastropod consumption would be more prevalent in gobies
>70 mm in total length. Moreover, as round goby density increased
across sites and over time, 3) the density of small (≤14 mm) dreissenids
and gastropods, as well as the taxa richness of small gastropods,
would be reduced; 4) gastropod taxa with a maximum size of
≤14 mm would be absent more frequently than larger taxa; and
5) dreissenid and gastropod sizes would increase as smaller molluscs
would be disproportionately removed through round goby predation.

xmethods
Study area
Our study made use of the same sampling techniques and sites as
those in a larger field survey that examined impacts of round gobies
on the entire macroinvertebrate community in the upper St. Lawrence
River (Kipp and Ricciardi, in press). In 2008, we sampled 13
sites across a range of round goby densities in the upper St. Lawrence
River between Prescott, Ontario and Montreal, Quebec, in order to determine
mollusc size structure (Table 1; Fig. 1). Given that round
gobies are frequently associated with rocky substrates (Jude et al.,
1992; Ray and Corkum, 2001), and mollusc assemblages on cobble
(diameter ~65–260 mm) are diverse in this area (Ricciardi et al.,
1997), sites having some cobble were chosen (Table 1). Four of
these sites were resampled in 2009 (Table 1). Data from cobble at 3
sites in 2005 (K. Harper and A. Ricciardi, unpublished data) and a
blank brick colonization experiment in 2006 (Ward and Ricciardi,
2010) were available for interannual comparisons (Table 1). Calcium
ion concentration [Ca2+] was sufficiently high at all sites and in all
years (mean 29.6 mg·L−1; range 20.6–32.0 mg·L−1) such that it
was not expected to limit mollusc abundance or diversity (Clarke,
1981; Jones and Ricciardi, 2005; Mellina and Rasmussen, 1994).
Round goby density quantification and diet analysis
Round goby density m−2 (Table 1) was quantified visually by a
SCUBA diver swimming at a constant depth of 1 m above the substrate
along two 30-m transects while holding a 1-m pole at arms'
length perpendicular to each transect and parallel to the bottom. All
round gobies that passed under the pole were counted (cf. Barton
et al., 2005). Round goby counts were always conducted by the
same diver at each site on the same day that molluscs were collected,
and before molluscs were sampled, in order to avoid disturbing the
fish. We recognize that visual estimates of round goby densities
using transect counts can be problematic because of the cryptic nature
of round gobies (Ray and Corkum, 2001) and their attraction to
SCUBA divers (Johnson et al., 2005a). This method was chosen because
it is unobtrusive and inexpensive, and allowed density estimates
to be compared with each other (although not to those made
using other sampling methods in the Great Lakes). Transects were
placed in 1–2 m of water parallel to shore, either end-to-end at sites
with steep slopes, or at the same points along the shore at sites
with gentle slopes. For one analysis, sites were ranked in terms of
their degree of invasion. They were classified into two categories
based on both round goby density and time since invasion, in which
gobies were: (i) present for 0–2 years at densities ≤1.6 m−2 at
early-invasion sites, or (ii) present for 2 or more years at densities
>1.6 m−2 at late-invasion sites (Table 1). Time since invasion
(Table 1) was estimated using information from Hickey and Fowlie
(2005) and Fuller et al. (2010), as well as from personal observations.
In late August 2009, 130 round gobies were sampled for analysis
of GI tract contents at four sites in Lac Saint-Louis — a fluvial lake
near Montreal. These sites were chosen because they were those for
which 2009 macroinvertebrate community and mollusc size structure
data were available. Round gobies were captured during the day with
unbaited minnow traps or gill nets (length 14.25 m, height 1.80 m,
mesh size 5.5 mm) deployed at 1–2 m depth for 1 h (Table 1). We
measured the total lengths (to 1 mm) of gobies using a fish ruler
and gape height (to 0.1 mm) using digital calipers. Upon dissection
in the laboratory, GI tracts were placed in 95% ethanol; within
13 months, their contents were subsequently analyzed under dissecting
microscopes (45×). These samples were analyzed randomly so
that any potential changes in biomass due to preservation would
not exert consistent effects at specific sites. Each prey item was identified
to the lowest taxon possible and weighed to the nearest mg
(preserved wet weight). The longest axes of all dreissenid mussel
fragments and all whole gastropods found in GI tracts were measured
to 0.1 mm with digital calipers.
Mollusc collection
Along the transects laid out for round goby density counts, a
SCUBA diver haphazardly tossed a 0.25 m2 quadrat to sample cobbles
eight times along one transect and seven times along the other. Only
cobbles found entirely inside the quadrat were chosen for sampling
and only one cobble per quadrat was retained. Each cobble sample
was placed in doubled sealable plastic bags underwater and transported
in coolers back to the laboratory. Percent cobble (Table 1)
was estimated visually inside the 0.25 m2 quadrat by counting the
number of 10 cm×10 cm squares containing cobble within in a 5×5
grid. In 2008 and 2009, sampling was carried out in August and
early September. Bricks from the site sampled in 2006 (Pointe-du-
Moulin) by Ward and Ricciardi (2010) were returned to the laboratory
for analysis in September, after having incubated in shallow water
in the littoral zone at depths b3 m for 53 days, beginning in July. A
SCUBA diver placed these bricks in sealable plastic bags underwater,
and they were then transported in a cooler back to the laboratory
within 3 h. Cobble samples from the three sites sampled in 2005
(Châteauguay East, Les Coteaux and Melocheville) by K. Harper and
A. Ricciardi (unpublished data) were also sampled in the shallow littoral
zone b3 m deep. They were sampled from July 10 to July 31 by
snorkelers, who placed the cobble in plastic bags underwater for subsequent
transport to the laboratory. All samples were thus taken in
mid- to late-summer. Differences in timing of sampling between
July and September were not important for many gastropods and
dreissenids with lifespans greater than 1 year, such as Elimia and
Dreissena (e.g. see Brown and Lydeard, 2010; Clarke, 1981;
Cummings and Graf, 2010; Mackie and Schloesser, 1996). For gastropods
such as Amnicola and Physella, which frequently survive for only
1 year, studies indicate that ranges in size distributions are relatively
similar in July, August, and September (e.g. see DeWitt, 1955; Pinel-
Alloul and Magnin, 1973). Cobble and brick sample sizes varied due
to time constraints and the loss of some discarded samples
(Table 1). In the laboratory, all molluscs retained by a 500-μm sieve
(Nalepa and Robertson, 1981) were removed with forceps from the
cobble samples and placed immediately in 95% ethanol. In order to
standardize mollusc abundance data for area, cobble surface area
was estimated by measuring three orthogonal dimensions of each
rock: length, width, and height, in cm (Dall, 1979). Mollusc processing
in the laboratory was similar for the 2006 bricks (Ward and
Ricciardi, 2010) and the 2005 cobbles (K. Harper and A. Ricciardi,
unpublished data). Mollusc taxa were identified to the lowest possible
taxon (Clarke, 1981; May and Marsden, 1992), and the shells' longest
axes were measured to 0.1 mm with digital calipers.
Statistical analyses
Regression analyses (including multiyear data from the same site)
were used to relate dependent variables to round goby density. In
order to control pseudoreplication, generalized least squares (GLS)
auto-regressive models of order 1 were used to model the temporally
correlated error structure at sites that were sampled repeatedly. Likelihood
ratio tests were used to ascertain if the temporal correlation in
the error structure was statistically significant (Zuur et al., 2009). The
false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated for multiple (≥10) tests on
the same data, in order to correct the familywise error rate
(Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Dreissenid data from Pointe-du-
Moulin in 2006 were excluded from analyses, owing to the fact that
the bricks from the colonization experiment by Ward and Ricciardi
(2010) were not deployed in the river long enough for dreissenids
to reach similar size and density to those in the surrounding community.
Proportional data (e.g. percent gastropod biomass) were transformed
as sin−1 (x0.5) and absolute abundance and length data
were log10-transformed, where appropriate.
Round goby impacts on mollusc size structure and diversity
At four sites, we determined whether the density of small
(≤14 mm length) and large (>14 mm) dreissenids and gastropods,
and the taxa richness of small and large gastropods, were ranked
higher prior to round goby invasion than in post-invasion years. We
applied one-tailed, non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum tests to
these data because they comprised a large number of zeros. For all
sites and years, ANCOVAs were used to test if site-level mean dreissenid
and gastropod density and pooled gastropod taxa richness declined
more rapidly in the smaller size class compared to the larger
one as round goby density increased. For these analyses, round goby
density was the covariate and the single factor tested was size class.
One-factor ANOVAs with Type II sums of squares for unbalanced
designs (due to unequal sample sizes; see Table 1) were used to
test for variation in rock area among years at each resampled site.
The factor tested was therefore ‘year’. In the case of a significant result,
Tukey's honest significance difference tests were applied to determine
between which years rock areas differed at a given site.
This analysis was performed to assess if species–(rock) area relationships
— rather than changes in round goby density — could explain
differences observed in gastropod taxa richness through time, as the
latter response variable was not area-corrected. At the site level, we
related pooled rock area per site to round goby density using linear
regression; thus, we were able to evaluate if the two variables were
correlated and hence if pooled species–(rock) area relationships confounded
the relationship between round goby density and gastropod
taxa richness per site.
Fisher's exact tests were used to determine if there was an association
between two invasion stages (early-invasion vs late-invasion)
and the number of sites with gastropod families present or absent.
Regressions were used to relate mean and median gastropod and
dreissenid size for pooled samples to round goby density across sites.
Round goby gape limitation and ontogenetic diet shift
We used simple linear regression to relate the maximum length of
the longest dreissenid fragment recovered from each round goby GI
tract to round goby gape size. A similar regression on the maximum
length of the largest whole gastropod from each GI tract was also
performed.
Linear regressions were conducted to relate the biomass, volume,
and numerical abundance of both dreissenids and gastropods recovered
from GI tracts to round goby total length, using proportions
and absolute values. In all cases, we excluded round goby GI tracts
that did not contain the mollusc taxon being assessed. Finally, we
used Fisher's exact tests to assess whether there was an association
between round goby size class (≤70 mm and >70 mm) and the occurrence
of dreissenids and gastropods in GI tracts.
Round goby prey preference
Variation in round goby total length among the four sites was tested
by using a one-factor ANOVA (with ‘site’ as the factor) with
Tukey's post-hoc comparisons. In order to ascertain whether mollusc
taxa were preferred prey items in round goby diets, we calculated
prey selectivity using Ivlev's index: Eabundance=(px−rx)/(px+rx),
where rx = percent numerical abundance of a prey category in all
GI tracts at a site, and px = percent numerical abundance of the resource
found at a site (Ivlev, 1961). Positive values of the index indicate
prey preference, while negative values indicate avoidance. The
index was also calculated for biomass (Ebiomass) to account for the influence
of differential sizes between prey items on prey choice (Ivlev,
1961). Percent contributions of the prey resource were obtained at
each of the four sites using mean area-corrected macroinvertebrate
density or biomass data from 2009 cobble samples (Kipp and
Ricciardi, in press). The four sites used in these analyses were generally
dominated by cobble, which comprised 50–100% of the substrate
in 2008 and 2009 (Table 1).
We tested whether the rank importance of mollusc prey categories
was higher in comparison to categories of other macroinvertebrates
available, and were not interested in the absolute values of
the prey preference index chosen. Lechowicz (1982) showed that
the rank orders, but not the absolute values, of prey categories were
similar for various prey preference indices, including Ivlev's E. We
emphasize, therefore, that the values of Eabundance and Ebiomass in our
study should be analyzed only in terms of their relative rank. As
such, we applied Friedman's non-parametric test (the equivalent of
an unreplicated two-way ANOVA) to the selectivity indices to determine
if their ranked values varied between prey categories across
sites. In this case, the two factors considered were prey category
and site. Note that for the Friedman test, using the FDR was not possible
due to constraints of the statistics package (R version 2.6.2),
and we therefore applied standard Bonferroni correction. Statistical
significance at the 0.05 level was also reported, as standard Bonferroni
correction is overly conservative (Gotelli and Ellison, 2004; Moran,
2003; Rice, 1989). All statistical analyses were conducted in R version
2.6.2.

xresults
Round goby impacts on mollusc size structure and diversity
Genera and families of gastropods recovered across sites and years
included: Ferrissia, Ancylidae; Bithynia, Bithyniidae; Amnicola and
Marstonia, Hydrobiidae; Stagnicola, Lymnaeidae; Physella, Physidae;
Gyraulus, Promenetus, and Helisoma, Planorbidae; Elimia, Pleuroceridae;
and Cipangopaludina, Viviparidae. The latter four genera can attain
>14 mm size. However, the only large gastropods recovered
from cobble samples across sites were a few individuals of Elimia
and Cipangopaludina. The occurrence of gastropods in all families, except
for the two largest (Pleuroceridae and Viviparidae) and the
smallest (Hydrobiidae), was correlated with invasion stage (Table 2).
There were no statistically detectable declines observed for either
dreissenid size class at Châteauguay East in 2008 or 2009, in comparison
to the pre-invasion year (one-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum tests
corrected for the FDR on 12 tests; Table 3; Fig. 2a). Statistically detectable
declines were more consistent at Les Coteaux (Fig. 2b) and Melocheville
(Fig. 2c) for the larger dreissenid size class (Table 3).
In contrast, after round goby invasion, densities (Fig. 2) and taxa
richness (Fig. 3) of small gastropods were ranked lower more frequently
than densities and taxa richness of large gastropods (onetailed
Wilcoxon rank sum tests corrected for the FDR on 16 tests for
each of gastropod density and gastropod taxa richness; Table 3). Châteauguay
East was an exception, where no declines in gastropod density
or taxa richness were detected (Figs. 2a, 3a).
Likelihood ratio tests indicated that, in general, the temporal correlation
in the error structure for ANCOVAs and regressions was not
statistically significant, with the exception of two cases: the ANCOVA
with dreissenid density as a response variable and regressions between
mean and median dreissenid length. Nevertheless, in these
cases, GLS tests yielded the same statistical conclusions with regard
to accepting or rejecting null hypotheses as linear regressions and
ANCOVAs; therefore, for clarity, we present only the results from
the latter. GLS outputs are available upon request from the senior
author.
For the ANCOVA with dreissenid density as a response variable,
the round goby density×mussel size interaction was not significant
(F1,36=0.5, n=40, p=0.5; slope=−0.16 and −0.07 for large and
small dreissenids, respectively; Fig. 4a). Upon removing the interaction
term, dreissenid size class was significant (F1,37=10.4, n=40,
p=0.003), and round goby density was not significant (F1,37=3.3,
n=40, p=0.08).
For the ANCOVA with gastropod density as a response variable,
the round goby density×mussel size interaction was significant
(slope=−0.21 and −0.41 for large and small gastropods, respectively;
F1,38=4.6, n=42, p=0.04), but only with the inclusion of
the Loyalist Park site (Fig. 4b). When this site was removed, the
slopes were statistically indistinguishable across sites (F1,36=1.9,
n=40, p=0.2). In the latter case, both gastropod size class
(F1,37=64.6, n=40, pb0.0001) and the covariate (round goby density:
F1,37=31.3, n=40, pb0.0001) were significant.
For the ANCOVA with gastropod taxa richness as a response variable,
the round goby density×gastropod size interaction was significant
(slope=−0.18 and −1.46 for the large and small size classes,
respectively; F1,38=17.7, n=42, p=0.0002), and this remained
true even when Loyalist Park was excluded (F1,36=13.5, n=40,
p=0.0008; Fig. 4c). Therefore, the group effect (gastropod size) was
difficult to interpret.
For resampled sites, rock area did not vary across years at Pointedu-
Moulin (mean rock area=364 cm2±18 S.E.; ANOVA, F2,37=1.0,
p=0.4); Châteauguay East (mean rock area=345 cm2±26 S.E.;
ANOVA, F2,35=1.0, p=0.4); or Melocheville (mean rock
area=330 cm2±26 S.E.; ANOVA, F2,37=1.7, p=0.2). For Les
Coteaux, there was variation in rock area across years (ANOVA,
F2,36=13.7, pb0.0001); post-hoc comparisons indicated that cobble
from 2008 (mean rock area=215 cm2±28 S.E., n=15) was smaller
than that from 2005 (mean rock area=424 cm2±52 S.E., n=9,
p=0.0005) and 2009 (mean rock area=413 cm2±26 S.E., n=15,
p=0.0001). There was no relationship between round goby density
and total pooled rock area at the site level (linear regression,
F1,19=0.9, n=21, p=0.4).
There was no relationship between round goby density and dreissenid
shell length (linear regressions, mean length vs goby density:
F1,18=0.9, n=20, p=0.4; median length vs goby density:
F1,18=0.1, n=20, p=0.8). In contrast, median gastropod size declined
with increasing round goby density across sites (Fig. 4d).
Mean gastropod size also tended to decline with round goby density,
but not significantly so (y=3.73−0.31 x, R2=0.13, F1,19=2.9,
n=21, p=0.1).
Round goby gape limitation and ontogenetic diet shift
The mean gape height for 130 gobies sampled across the four sites
was 7.4 mm (range: 4.5–13.0 mm). A total of 62 individual dreissenids
were recovered from the GI tracts. There was a strong positive
relationship between round goby gape height and dreissenid fragment
size (Fig. 5). Upon examining GI tracts, no whole gastropods
>7 mm were found, and gastropod fragments were few and small.
There was no relationship between gape height and maximum gastropod
size (Fig. 5). A total of 425 recognizable gastropods were recovered
from the GI tracts. The most abundant gastropod was the
snail Amnicola, accounting for 80% of all individuals. The next most
abundant was Gyraulus (5%), followed by Physella (3%) and Stagnicola
(3%). Ferrissia and Elimia each accounted for b1% of the total. Unidentified
snails accounted for 8% of the total. In no instance did the maximum
size of a gastropod found in a GI tract exceed gape height,
whereas this occurred in three instances with dreissenid fragments.
There were no significant relationships between round goby total
length and log-transformed absolute values of gastropod abundance
(linear regression, F1,75=1.4, n=77, p=0.2), biomass (F1,63=1.4,
n=65, p=0.2), and volume (F1,48=0.0, n=50, p~1.0), or arcsinetransformed
proportional values of gastropod abundance
(F1,75=0.0, n=77, p~1.0) and volume (F1,52=1.8, n=54, p=0.2).
There was a tendency for percent gastropod biomass to decline with
round goby total length (sin−1(y0.5)=0.95−0.01 x, R2=0.06,
F1,63=4.3, n=65, p=0.04), although the relationship was not significant
upon FDR correction. In contrast, dreissenid biomass (preserved
wet weight) and volume increased with round goby total length, as
did percent dreissenid biomass (Fig. 6). The majority of individual
fish (46 of 53 in which mussels were present) contained only one
mussel, while five fish contained two mussels, and two fish contained
three mussels. Given the small range in the number of dreissenids
consumed, relationships between round goby total length and the
proportional and absolute values of dreissenid abundance in round
goby GI tracts were not evaluated.
There were 60 fish ≤70 mm and 17 fish >70 mm that contained
no dreissenids, while 20 fish ≤70 mm and 33 fish >70 mm contained
dreissenids. There were 37 fish ≤70 mm and 16 fish >70 mm that
contained no gastropods, whereas 43 fish ≤70 mm and 34 fish
>70 mm had consumed gastropods. The occurrence of dreissenids in
fish stomachs differed with round goby length class (≤70 mm and
>70 mm; Fisher's exact test, pb0.0001), but no such difference was
observed for gastropods (p=0.1).
Round goby diet and prey preference
Mean total length for the 130 round gobies collected at the four sites
sampled in 2009 was 69mm (range 47–104 mm). At individual sites,
mean total lengths were as follows: Châteauguay East, 66±1.54 mm
(S.E.), n=36 (range 48–98 mm); Les Coteaux, 77±2.23mm, n=30
(range 54–104 mm); Melocheville, 73±1.94 mm, n=28 (range
53–95mm); and Pointe-du-Moulin, 63±1.08 mm, n=36 (range
47–80mm). There was significant variation among sites (ANOVA,
F3,126=14.4, pb0.0001), and Les Coteaux and Melocheville round
gobies were larger than those from Châteauguay East (Tukey's posthoc
comparisons, pb0.0001 and p=0.03, respectively) and Pointe-du-
Moulin (pb0.0001 and p=0.0003, respectively).
Only two of the 130 round goby GI tracts were empty. Friedman
tests indicated that prey categories varied significantly in their rank
importance across the four sites, according to Ivlev's prey selectivity
index calculated as both Eabundance (Q18=4.39, n=19, p=0.0002)
and Ebiomass (Q11=3.15, n=12, p=0.008) (Table 4). For both indices,
there was a tendency for Gastropoda, Chironomidae, Ostracoda, and
Trichoptera to rank as the most preferred prey, while Dreissenidae,
Hirudinea, and Acari tended to rank as the most avoided prey.

xdiscussion
Round goby impacts on dreissenid size structure
Surprisingly, there were no consistent trends in dreissenid size
structure with increasing round goby density across sites or years.
We predicted that declines would be most pronounced for the small
size class, as the average maximum size of mussels reported consumed
by round gobies in the Great Lakes is 14 mm (Clark, 2007;
Djuricich and Janssen, 2001; Ghedotti et al., 1995; Jude et al., 1995;
Ray and Corkum, 1997; Taraborelli and Schaner, 2002; Thomas,
1997). Contrary to expectations, significant declines occurred more
frequently at Melocheville and at Les Coteaux in 2008 and 2009 for
the large dreissenid size class. It is of note that Melocheville and Les
Coteaux round gobies were larger than those at the other two sites
tested over time. It seems possible that larger round gobies consumed
more of the larger mussels, contributing to impacts in the larger size
class more frequently. The larger mussel size class also tended to decline
across all sites. Our results therefore seemed to suggest only occasional
correlation between mussels >14 mm and round goby
density.
Some of these results might not have been caused by round goby
predation, but rather by other ongoing changes in dreissenid populations
in the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence basin. For example, the replacement
of D. polymorpha by D. bugensis in the Great Lakes has occurred
in conjunction with general declines in total dreissenid densities in
some regions (Haynes et al., 2005). Indeed, evidence suggests that
D. polymorpha is being replaced gradually by D. bugensis across our
sites, with increasing round goby density and time since invasion
(Kipp and Ricciardi, in press). However, this replacement began
years before round gobies became abundant (Ricciardi and
Whoriskey, 2004).
The lack of consistent effects of round goby predation on dreissenids
could conceivably result from several factors, including: (i) insufficient
predation on dreissenids owing to relatively small sizes of
fish; (ii) stronger preferences for alternative prey; (iii) insufficient
time for impacts to accrue; (iv) relatively low round goby densities;
(v) low dreissenid densities in comparison to the Great Lakes, leading
to lower encounter rates with optimally sized mussels; and (vi) insufficient
statistical power to detect effects. It may have been too early in
the invasion for effects to be detected at some sites, as discussed
below with respect to gastropods at Châteauguay East. However,
round gobies were estimated to have been present at some sites for
up to 5 years, which exceeds time frames in studies in which a significant
reduction in dreissenids has been attributed to round goby predation
(e.g. ~3 years; Lederer et al., 2008). It is possible that round
goby densities in the upper St. Lawrence River are still too low to produce
strong impacts on dreissenid populations. In two studies where
round goby densities were estimated at 14–15 m−2, gobies were the
implicated cause of changes in dreissenid densities (Barton et al.,
2005; Kuhns and Berg, 1999) and size structure (Barton et al.,
2005). In both studies, round goby densities were 2.3–2.5 times
higher than that at our highest density site (Loyalist Park). However,
we note that because our round goby density estimates were made by
visual counts along transects, they were likely imprecise and would
need to be verified by other means (e.g. videotaped counts).
Significant impacts might occur only where both dreissenids and
round gobies are present at high densities. Dreissenid densities tend
to be higher in lentic systems (Mellina and Rasmussen, 1994;
Ricciardi et al., 1995), and dreissenid populations in the upper St.
Lawrence River might be substantially reduced in density compared
to those in the Great Lakes such that round goby predatory impacts
in the river are muted by comparison. Prior to round goby invasion
at the four resampled sites in this study, dreissenid densities in the
small size class varied from b10 to 2000 m−2 rock surface area,
while densities in the large size class varied between ~100 and
2500 m−2 rock surface area. These numbers are several times smaller
than those in Lake Erie (Barton et al., 2005). In the experiment by
Kuhns and Berg (1999), changes in dreissenid density occurred only
for tiles colonized by 100,000 individuals m−2, whereas tiles with
10,000 m−2 showed no changes in the presence of round gobies. On
the other hand, significant impacts were observed in nearshore
areas of Green Bay, Lake Michigan where dreissenid densities were
~50–350 m−2 immediately prior to round goby invasion (Lederer
et al., 2008).
Although it is possible that low statistical power combined with
temporal variability in sampling hindered detection of the effects of
round goby predation, such factors did not prevent detection of impacts
on gastropods. Moreover, bioenergetic models calculate round
gobies consume b0.2% of available dreissenid biomass in the Great
Lakes (Bunnell et al., 2005; Johnson et al., 2005b). The negative impacts
of round gobies on dreissenid densities and size structure
might occur only where round goby densities are locally high.
Round goby impacts on gastropod size structure and taxa richness
The data supported our predictions regarding round goby impacts
on the structure and diversity of the two gastropod size classes studied
in the upper St. Lawrence River. Across sites and time at three of
four resampled sites, the small size class generally experienced the
strongest declines in density and taxa richness. For tests on taxa richness,
because total pooled rock area was not correlated with round
goby density, it is unlikely that species–(rock) area relationships
could have confounded changes to gastropod taxa richness across
sites. Species–area relationships were also unlikely to have affected
the results at three of the four resampled sites. Only at Les Coteaux
did rock area differ between years; rock area in 2008 was smaller
than in 2005 and 2009, which could have biased the observed
changes in taxa richness in small gastropods from 2005 to 2008, but
does not explain reduced taxa richness in 2009.
One of the resampled sites, Châteauguay East, clearly stood out as
an exception to the dominant trends seen for sites sampled before
and after round goby invasion. Of the four resampled sites,
Châteauguay East exhibited the lowest round goby density and time
since invasion in 2009. Thus, round gobies were probably not present
at sufficiently high densities long enough to exert strong impacts.
Moreover, the pre-invasion samples in 2005 may have been collected
too close to the wave swept zone and for this reason comprised an already
depauperate macroinvertebrate community (there is no record
of the exact depth at which they were taken).
One important environmental factor that potentially affects gastropod
distributions is current flow. For example, lymnaeids, planorbids
and physids are associated most with low velocity (e.g. Nelson
and Lieberman, 2002), while pleurocerids are typically considered
more characteristic of lotic habitats (Brown et al., 2008). Nevertheless,
gastropods often exhibit great phenotypic plasticity. Pleurocerid
snails, for example, can colonize low-flow habitats and sometimes
prefer them over high-flow habitats (Brown et al., 2008). We did
not measure current velocity at our sites, but observed that it was
generally low in mid to late summer. Indeed, all of our sites were situated
in littoral zones with some macrophyte cover, often in small
embayments or low flow areas. The exception was Pointe-du-
Moulin, an exposed site where velocity was relatively high (Ward
and Ricciardi, 2010). Nevertheless, prior to round goby invasion, a variety
of gastropods — including lymnaeids, physids, and planorbids —
were abundant at this site (Ward and Ricciardi, 2010). As at Les
Coteaux and Melocheville, two other sites with lower current velocities,
smaller gastropods underwent similar changes over time in conjunction
with round goby invasion. We recognize that current
velocity structures gastropod communities in lotic environments
and could have affected relationships between round gobies and gastropods.
However, given that gastropod communities across our sites
in the upper St. Lawrence River were similarly diverse and abundant
prior to round goby invasion (Masson et al., 2009; Pinel-Alloul et al.,
1996; Ricciardi et al., 1997; Ward and Ricciardi, 2010), it seems likely
that the effects we observed in this study were related primarily to
round gobies, rather than current flow.
Overall, the weight of evidence suggests stronger impacts on the
small gastropod size class. Indeed, snail families that actually attained
a size of >14 mm in the field (Viviparidae and Pleuroceridae) were
not correlated with the stages of round goby invasion, while smaller
families (with the exception of the Hydrobiidae) did exhibit such a
correlation. Surprisingly, the median (but not the mean) size of
gastropods was negatively correlated with round goby density across
sites, which apparently contradicts the hypothesis that round gobies
reduce the abundance of small gastropods. However, the most frequently
remaining families at late-invasion sites were large Pleuroceridae
and small Hydrobiidae. Despite heavy round goby predation
on hydrobiids, this gastropod family remained the most abundant
and comprised the smallest individuals. Small individuals may have
been relatively difficult for a visual predator to remove from interstitial
substrate (cf. Stewart et al., 1999). The median size of the entire
gastropod distribution at such sites was thus quite small. For sites in
earlier stages of invasion, a larger number of families intermediate
in size between hydrobiids and pleurocerids were present (Ancylidae,
Bithyniidae, Lymnaeidae, Physidae, and Valvatidae), causing the median
to increase.
The most abundant gastropod taxon occurring both at field sites
and in round goby GI tracts was the hydrobiid Amnicola, which can attain
a maximum size of 4.5 mm in the upper St. Lawrence River
(Pinel-Alloul and Magnin, 1973; personal observations). Not one of
the Amnicola collected from round goby GI tracts or cobble samples
in 2009 exceeded 3 mm. Given that Amnicola occurred at various
mid- and late-invasion sites, where it was always considerably smaller
than 4.5 mm, it is possible that this species has been able to reproduce
successfully at very small sizes. Phenotypic changes have been
observed in other gastropods in response to predators. For example,
a documented decline in the size of intertidal gastropods has been attributed
to predation pressure that made it more advantageous to reproduce
at smaller sizes (Rochette et al., 2003). This possible
phenotypic change in response to predation highlights the potentially
broad range of subtle impacts the round goby could exert in a novel
environment.
Although dreissenid mussels themselves can alter the composition
and size structure of gastropods (Ricciardi et al., 1997; Ward and
Ricciardi, 2007), it is unlikely that changes to the median gastropod
size occurred indirectly through declines in dreissenids because
there were no major changes to dreissenid density at our sites. Even
if larger dreissenids declined with round goby density, we would expect
the size of all gastropods to be positively affected, given that
large snails tend to be scarce in the presence of high dreissenid densities
(Ward and Ricciardi, 2007).
Round goby gape limitation and ontogenetic diet shift
Round goby consumption of dreissenids was gape limited, as suggested
by the fact that no whole dreissenids were consumed and that
dreissenid fragment size increased with round goby gape size. This
result complements a recent study from Presque Isle Bay, Lake Erie,
where the size of whole and crushed dreissenids consumed by
round gobies increased with the total length of the fish (Andraso
et al., 2011). In contrast to dreissenids, the size of consumed gastropods
was not related to round goby gape height in our study. Round
gobies may prefer gastropods over dreissenids, as suggested by their
prey selectivity. An abundance of gastropods that lack the size, crushing
resistance, and byssal attachment of dreissenids might be a more
energetically profitable prey, particularly for round gobies that are
not fully mature. Indeed, other studies have found that various molluscivores
prefer smaller snails over larger molluscs including dreissenids,
likely because of reduced handling time and shell thickness
(Nyström and Pérez, 1998; Stein et al., 1975). In our study, Physella
and Ferrissia are thin-shelled species (Clarke, 1981) that occurred
much less frequently at late-invasion sites. Indeed, Physella exhibits
particularly low crushing resistance with respect to molluscivorous
fishes (Huckins, 1997). Although other snails such as Amnicola are
more compact and may therefore be more resistant to crushing
(Huckins, 1997; Lewis and Magnuson, 1999), they lack byssal threads
and are considerably smaller than the majority of available dreissenids.
Thicker-shelled genera such as Bithynia, Valvata, Helisoma and
Stagnicola are locally abundant in benthic habitats throughout the
St. Lawrence River (Masson et al., 2009; Pinel-Alloul et al., 1996;
Ricciardi et al., 1997; Ward and Ricciardi, 2010), but were all reduced
in frequency of occurrence at late-invasion sites in our
study. These species could have been preferred by round gobies
over dreissenids, particularly because of their lack of byssal threads.
The small size of gastropods recovered from GI tracts in this study
might simply indicate that larger individuals in the appropriate size
range, from ~7–14 mm, were no longer available. In 2009, almost all
gastropods available were b5 mm at the four sites sampled, with
the exception of the occasional Elimia and one Stagnicola. Without
conducting size-selection experiments, it is not possible to determine
whether the observed dietary composition was due to prey preference
or prey availability. Only very minimal predation on Elimia was
observed (one snail b2 mm in length found in a single fish GI tract
at each of Châteauguay East and Melocheville), possibly because of
their thicker, more compact shells in comparison to other taxa available.
Nevertheless, large gastropods — which were almost exclusively
Elimia — responded negatively to round goby density across sites,
suggesting a predation effect.
There was evidence for an ontogenetic diet shift: the biomass proportion
of the diet composed of dreissenids increased with round
goby length and dreissenid presence in the diet was associated with
round goby size class. Round gobies sampled in Lac Saint-Louis
were 47–104 mm in total length and showed a substantial shift toward
molluscivory at lengths of ~70 mm. The observed ontogenetic
diet shift for mid-sized round gobies and the observed range in
round goby sizes are comparable to those for populations in the
Great Lakes (e.g. French and Jude, 2001; Janssen and Jude, 2001;
Jude et al., 1995). This round goby size range is also comparable to
those associated with substantial consumption of dreissenids in the
laboratory (e.g. 47 mussels day−1 per individual round goby;
Ghedotti et al., 1995) and significant impacts on dreissenid populations
in the field (Lederer et al., 2006, 2008). Altogether, these considerations
indicate that the size of round gobies alone probably does
not explain the variable effects on dreissenids found in this study, although
the combination of relatively small round goby sizes and densities
could play a role.
The differences in mean round goby size observed among sites
likely resulted from differences in time since invasion rather than
gear capture bias. Only minnow traps were used at Les Coteaux to
capture round gobies, whereas only gill nets were used at Châteauguay
East, Pointe-du-Moulin and Melocheville. Owing to the small
mesh size of our gill nets, we employed a modified capture method
in which we waited behind the net until a round goby swam into it,
and then quickly pulled up the leadline to capture it within the net,
before removing it by hand into a bucket. Therefore, the gill nets did
not contribute to selective bias in the size of fish captured. Our minnow
traps were large enough to capture the largest round gobies present
at our sites, but we do recognize that smaller round gobies tend
not to enter traps with larger fish (J. Janssen, University of Wisconsin–
Milwaukee, 2011, pers. comm.). Nevertheless, times since invasion
roughly matched differences in round goby size across sites:
Les Coteaux and Melocheville fish were larger than Châteauguay
East and Pointe-du-Moulin fish. By 2009, round gobies had been present
for 4 years at Les Coteaux, 3 years at Melocheville and Pointe-du-
Moulin, and 2 years at Châteauguay East. It seems most likely that differences
in round goby size across sites were due more to time since
invasion than the size selective bias of the minnow traps at Les
Coteaux only.
Round goby diet and prey preference
Gastropods, chironomids, trichopterans and ostracods were the
only prey categories consistently ranked the highest prior to Bonferroni
correction for all values of Ivlev's E. After Bonferroni correction
there were few prey categories ranked significantly differently from
one another; in this case, the Bonferroni correction applied to rank
tests was so conservative as to obscure differences in prey selection.
The ranking of these metrics for gastropods was consistent with our
expectations based on studies recording impacts on these taxa in
the Great Lakes (e.g. Kipp and Ricciardi, in press; Lederer et al.,
2006, 2008), and with our results.
Values of E for dreissenids were negative at all sites. The positive
preference for gastropods and chironomids, combined with apparent
avoidance of dreissenids, mirrors values of E reported from the Baltic
Sea, where round gobies preferred gastropods, chironomids, and annelids,
and avoided bivalves and crustaceans (Wandzel, 2003). Similar
results were found for a congeneric species, the monkey goby
Neogobius fluviatilis; in the Vistula River (Poland), where it is introduced,
the monkey goby exhibited positive values of E solely for dipteran
taxa, even though it is molluscivorous in a number of other
habitats (Grabowska et al., 2009). The preference for chironomids
was also similar to that recorded for the round goby in a recent
study in Great Lakes' tributary streams (Pennuto et al., 2010). However,
the lack of preference for dreissenids in our study contradicts laboratory
studies that show that round gobies from the Great Lakes
prefer dreissenids over native molluscs (Ghedotti et al., 1995). The
Ebiomass values in this study were more consistent with other laboratory
experiments in which round gobies preferred amphipods over
dreissenids (Diggins et al., 2002; Polačik et al., 2009), although the
Eabundance values in this study suggest that round gobies tended to
avoid dreissenids and amphipods at most sites. Also contrary to
this study, Barton et al. (2005) and Raby et al. (2010) found that
round gobies increased the non-dreissenid component of their diet
only after mussels became rare, indicating a preference for dreissenids
over other macroinvertebrates.
Factors that affect rates at which round gobies encounter prey include:
(i) substrate type and visibility (Diggins et al., 2002); (ii) availability
of appropriately sized mussels and their occurrence in refugia
on the undersides of rocks or in patches (Djuricich and Janssen,
2001); and (iii) the availability of mussel patches or macrophytes as
refugia for mobile macroinvertebrates (González and Burkart, 2004;
Kestrup and Ricciardi, 2009; Reed et al., 2004). Through their mediation
of encounter rates, these factors influence indices that attempt to
describe round goby preference or avoidance of prey. As these factors
may vary spatially and temporally, round goby prey preferences are
highly context dependent.
Implications of the study
Impacts of the round goby on non-dreissenid mollusc taxa have
rarely been explored in detail, although Poos et al. (2009) recently
reviewed the potential for round gobies to negatively affect freshwater
mussels via impacts on their obligate fish hosts in Great Lakes'
tributary streams. Research on potential impacts on non-dreissenid
molluscs in the St. Lawrence River has also been limited to date.
This was the first field study to investigate round goby prey selection
in relation to alterations to mollusc size structure in a large river. The
consistent effects on smaller gastropods and preference for such prey,
combined with the inconsistent effects on dreissenids, demonstrate
the heterogeneous impacts of this benthic predator. Our study supports
the view that local impacts on dreissenids may occur only
where round goby abundances are highly concentrated (Johnson
et al., 2005b; Patterson et al., 2005). Furthermore, variation in impacts
might be explained by the age structure of local round goby
populations. Smaller round gobies likely exert more direct predatory
effects on dreissenid-associated macroinvertebrates such as gastropods,
whereas larger round gobies consume a greater proportion of
dreissenids and exert more indirect effects (Lederer et al., 2006).
Therefore, benthic communities in the St. Lawrence River can be
expected to undergo further transformations as round goby population
structure changes over time.