xabstract
The effects of invasive species on native
communities often depend on the characteristics of the
recipient community and on the food habits of the invasive
species, becoming complicated when the invader is
omnivorous. In field enclosure experiments, we assessed
the direct and interactive effects of an invasive omnivorous
crayfish (Procambarus clarkii) and either native herbivorous
snails (Physella gyrina) or shrimp (Atyoida bisulcata)
on stream communities in California and Hawaii, respectively.
Based on literature data and the characteristics of
each study site, we predicted that crayfish would affect
primarily algal-based trophic linkages in an open California
stream but detritus-based trophic linkages in a shaded
Hawaiian stream, with trophic cascades mediated through
crayfish effects on primary consumers being observed in
both systems. As predicted, crayfish in California directly
reduced periphyton, filamentous algae, sediment, and snail
levels, but generated a cascade by decreasing snail densities
and increasing periphyton biomass. Contrary to prediction,
crayfish did not reduce total invertebrate biomass.
As predicted, crayfish in Hawaii reduced leaf litter,
filamentous algae, and benthic invertebrate biomass. Contrary
to our predictions, however, a trophic cascade was not
observed because shrimp did not affect periphyton levels,
crayfish did not reduce shrimp abundance, and crayfish had
greater negative impacts on filamentous algae than did
shrimp. Our findings highlight that the same invasive
species can generate different effects on disparate systems,
probably as mediated through the availability of different
food types, flexibility in the invasive species’ food habits,
and complex pathways of trophic interaction.


xintroduction
Although covering only a minute proportion of the Earth’s
surface (\2 %), freshwater systems contain 6 % of all
described species, but have extinction rates five times
higher than terrestrial and marine systems combined
(Ricciardi and Rasmussen 1999; Sala et al. 2000; Dudgeon
et al. 2006). The introduction and spread of invasive species,
and their impacts on native ecosystems, rank second
only to habit degradation as a threat to global biodiversity
(Sala et al. 2000). In some cases, invasive species may
remain undiscovered for many years with few discernible
ecological impacts; however, in other cases, the invasion
and spread of introduced species result in profound biological
and economic changes (Herbold and Moyle 1986;
Kolar and Lodge 2000). As a consequence, scientists and
managers are interested in determining the attributes of
invasive species and recipient communities which allow
invaders to thrive and greatly affect native communities,
including reductions or extinctions of native taxa.
The characteristics of invasive species that determine
their persistence and expansion in novel communities have
been postulated to include: (1) broad physiological tolerances,
(2) high genetic variability, (3) high fecundity, rapid
growth and early maturity, (4) rapid dispersal, and (5)
generalist habitats and diets (e.g., omnivory) (Kolar and
Lodge 2001). Regarding the last point, some invasive
omnivores pose multiple threats to native species through
competition for shared resources, predation on native taxa,
and alteration of environmental conditions and native prey
behavior (Polis et al. 2000; Turner et al. 2000; Vandermeer
2006; Thompson et al. 2007). The broad diets and habitat
tolerances of invasive omnivores often also dictate that
their impacts depend on recipient community attributes
such as: (1) the degree to which areas are affected by
human disturbance, (2) the comparability of new environments
to the alien species’ habitat of origin, (3) low or high
native species richness, and (4) the relative availability of
different food sources (Hobbs and Huenneke 1992; Levine
and D’Antonio 1999; Stohlgren et al. 1999; Naeem et al.
2000; Fridley et al. 2007). Likewise, systems affected by
changing land use patterns, such as those in California, as
well as native ecosystems with high levels of endemicity,
such as island ecosystems (e.g., Hawaii), may be particularly
vulnerable to invasions (Elton 1958; Vitousek and
Walker 1989; Nichols et al. 1990; Levine and D’Antonio
1999; Holway et al. 2002). Although many previous studies
have focused on the effects of invasive species on specific
native taxa, species invasions, particularly by omnivores,
can affect entire food webs via direct and indirect interactions
through multiple trophic levels.
Several studies have documented the importance of
omnivores in structuring lake and pond communities,
focusing on the effects of omnivorous crayfish on food
webs (Lodge et al. 1994; Nystro¨m et al. 1999). As generalized
omnivores, crayfish typically influence the biomass,
abundance, and species composition of algae,
macrophytes, detritus, and other benthic invertebrates;
however, these impacts are often specific to the taxa or
system under consideration. For example, the direct effects
of crayfish on highly mobile taxa (e.g., baetid mayflies)
may be weak relative to their impacts on slow-moving
invertebrates, such as snails (Parkyn et al. 1997; Nystro¨m
2005). Although omnivorous invasive decapods are often
abundant in streams with a diversity of food resources,
including algae and leaf litter, only a few studies have
assessed their separate and joint impacts with native
grazers and detritivores on stream communities (Hart 1992;
Creed 1994; Usio and Townsend 2004; Nilsson et al.
2008).
Here, we compare the impacts of the same invasive
crayfish species and native primary consumers (grazers,
detritivores) on the community of a temperate stream with
an open canopy in California (Ventura River) to their
impacts on a forested tropical stream community in Hawaii
(Waiau Stream). Unlike open California streams, Hawaiian
streams contain few invertebrate species (Ziegler 2002)
and receive substantial leaf litter inputs from abundant
riparian vegetation. We focused on the effects of an invasive
omnivore in temperate mainland and tropical island
systems because of the omnivore’s importance in influencing
benthic food webs (invertebrates, algae, leaf litter),
its potential to affect native consumers through both
competition and predation (Usio 2000; Klose and Cooper
2012), and the paucity of information about the effects of
an invasive omnivore on depauperate native stream invertebrate
communities on islands (Larned et al. 2003).
The red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii (Girard),
is native to the south central United States and is currently
the most broadly distributed crayfish species in the world,
reaching high densities in streams in southern California
and Hawaii (Gamradt and Katz 1996; Huner 2002; Riley
et al. 2005; Klose and Cooper 2012). The dominant
macroinvertebrate primary consumer in the southern Californian
stream we studied was the herbivorous snail Physella
gyrina (Say), whereas the atyid shrimp Atyoida
bisulcata (J.W. Randall), which primarily functions as a
collector/gatherer (Resh et al. 1990), was the most abundant
large macroinvertebrate in the Hawaiian stream. The
Ventura River had an open canopy and substantial biomasses
of both filamentous algae (Cladophora Ku¨tzing)
and invertebrate taxa (i.e., baetid mayflies, chironomids,
philopotamid caddisflies), moderate microalgae (primarily
diatoms) and physid snail biomass, and negligible leaf litter
inputs. The shaded Waiau Stream, on the other hand,
contained moderate levels of filamentous algae (Spirogyra
C.G. Nees) and invertebrate biomass (i.e., hydropsychid
caddisflies, nematodes, oligochaetes), abundant atyid
shrimp, a low biomass of microalgae (i.e., periphyton), and
high leaf litter levels (i.e., Hibiscus tiliaceus L., Schizostachyum
glaucifolium (Rupr.) Munro). To examine the
direct, indirect, and interactive community impacts of the
invasive red swamp crayfish, P. clarkii, and two native
consumers in disparate systems, we experimentally
manipulated crayfish and snails or shrimp in a cross-classified
design in field enclosures in streams in southern
California and Hawaii to address the following two questions.
(1) What are the individual and combined effects of
crayfish and snails (California) or shrimp (Hawaii) on
inorganic sediment, leaf litter mass, algal biomass, invertebrate
densities and biomass, and snail microdistributions
in systems which differ in abiotic and biotic characteristics?
(2) What do the individual and combined effects of an
invasive omnivorous crayfish and two native consumers in
dissimilar stream communities indicate about the direct and
indirect effects of crayfish on different food webs?
Because the red swamp crayfish is omnivorous and
typically reduces the biomass of both filamentous algae and
slow-moving benthic invertebrates (e.g., snails), we predicted
that crayfish in the unshaded California stream
would affect primarily the components of algal-based food
webs by directly grazing periphyton and filamentous algae,
and consuming aquatic insects and herbivorous snails, the
latter leading to a trophic cascade with increased microalgae
biomass (Fig. 1a) (Hart 1992; Creed 1994; Lodge
et al. 1994; Nystro¨m et al. 1999; Klose and Cooper 2012).
In the Hawaiian stream, on the other hand, we hypothesized
that crayfish would reduce both filamentous algae,
which were patchily distributed on the stream bottom, and
atyid shrimp densities (Banha and Anasta´cio 2011), the
latter resulting in increases in the biomasses of filamentous
algae and periphyton (primarily diatoms), as well as reduce
components of the detritus-based food web (i.e., collectors,
leaf litter, fine particulate organic matter) (Fig. 1b; Pringle
et al. 1993; Usio 2000; Schofield et al. 2001; Ziegler 2002).
We did not expect to see trophic cascades in the detritusbased
food chain because shredders, except for the omnivorous
crayfish, were virtually absent in Hawaii. Among
invertebrates, we predicted that crayfish would primarily
reduce large, slow-moving or sedentary prey (e.g., snails,
oligochaetes, odonates), but would have little direct effect
on evasive, mobile, and/or small prey (microcrustaceans,
amphipods, baetid mayflies) (Parkyn et al. 2001; Stenroth
and Nystro¨m 2003; Nystro¨m 2005). We examined our
hypotheses by manipulating the densities of crayfish and
two primary herbivorous/detritivorous consumers (snails or
shrimp) in enclosures in a Californian and a Hawaiian
stream.


xmethods
Invasion and natural histories
Ventura River and Waiau Stream
The precise timing and location of red swamp crayfish
(P. clarkii) introductions into southern California, including
the Ventura River, are unknown; however, this crayfish
species was first documented from a southern California
stream (near Pasadena, Los Angeles County) in the 1920s
(Holmes 1924). Based on historical records, it is likely that
P. clarkii spread into rivers and streams from reservoirs
where they escaped or were deliberately released as bait for
recreational sport fishing (Riegel 1959). Stomach content
and stable isotope analyses show that crayfish feed on
detritus, algae, plants, invertebrates (including other crayfish),
and vertebrates (including fish and amphibians)
(Guan and Wiles 1997; Parkyn et al. 2001; Stenroth and
Nystro¨m 2003), and become key shredders in systems
receiving high inputs of allochthonous material (Ilheu and
Bernardo 1993). The distribution of the freshwater gastropod
P. gyrina extends from California to the Gulf of
Mexico, and northward to Quebec and the Northwest
Territories (Dillon and Wethington 2004). P. gyrina consumes
detritus, algae, fungi, and living animal and vascular
plant material, but is primarily a herbivore (Sheldon 1987).
P. clarkii was first introduced to the Hawaiian Island of
Oahu in 1934 then spread rapidly, invading Kauai and
Maui by 1954 and Molokai and Hawaii shortly thereafter,
becoming a pest which damaged both taro plants and irrigation
levees (Huner 1977). The mountain atyid shrimp,
A. bisulcata, is an algivore/detritivore endemic to the
Hawaiian Islands, functioning as a collector/gatherer at low
flow velocities and as an omnivorous filter feeder at high
current speeds (Resh et al. 1990; Ziegler 2002).
The design of field experiments in California
and Hawaii
Because the Waiau Stream site was remote and difficult to
reach, we could not use the same experimental enclosures
in the Ventura River and Waiau Stream. Although we
manipulated the presence-absence of crayfish and dominant
primary consumers (snails in the Ventura River,
shrimp in Waiau Stream) in a cross-factorial design in both
systems, we used rectangular stream channels (2 m
long 9 0.31 m wide 9 0.15 m high) in the Ventura River
and smaller cylindrical enclosures (0.30 m diameter
9 0.37 m high) in Waiau Stream. Despite differences
in the size and shape of experimental arenas used at these
sites, the results suggest that these differences probably did
not affect experimental outcomes because crayfish effects
were most manifest on sedentary resources in both systems
(Englund et al. 2001). Nevertheless, the methods and
results for both systems are presented separately here, as
two independent experiments, but the results from the two
systems are compared to each other and to those from other
systems in the ‘‘Discussion’’.
Study sites
Ventura River
This experiment was conducted for 12 days in a third-order
section of the Ventura River, southern California, during
July 2004. The Ventura River flows southward 26 km from
an elevation of[1,400 m in the Transverse Ranges to the
Pacific Ocean, draining a 590-km2 catchment. The Ventura
River is alkaline (pH 8.0) and mesotrophic (NH4
? =
0.1–0.6 lmol L-1, NO3
- = 31.3–37.7 lmol L-1, SRP =
1.2–1.9 lmol L-1). The study section was 6–8 m wide
with a 25 % riparian canopy represented by giant reed
(Arundo donax L.), western sycamore (Platanus racemosa
Nutt), and willow (Salix spp. L). Current velocities and
water temperatures ranged from 4 to 25 cm s-1 and 18 to
22.5 C during the study period, average water depth was
0.3 m in riffles and ranged from 1 to 4 m in pools, and
substrata consisted largely of sand and gravel in pools, and
medium to large cobbles in riffles. Cladophora sp. (Ku¨tzing)
was the dominant macroalga, microalgae were represented
by diatoms, and common benthic invertebrates
included mayflies (Tricorythodes Ulmer), chironomids
(Chironomidae: Chironominae, Orthocladiinae), worms
(oligochaetes), crustaceans (Hyalella azteca Saussure),
microcrustaceans (ostracods, chydorid cladocerans, copepods),
and gastropods (P. gyrina). The density of P. clarkii
was estimated on two occasions using night visual counts
within a modified quadrat sampler. Ten 1-m2 areas were
delineated with four re-bar posts driven into substrata and
extended above the water line (0.3–0.4 m water depth).
Immediately prior to the visual count of each area, the
re-bar was surrounded on all sides by 0.4 cm mesh netting
forming a quadrat. Crayfish density was estimated by using
a headlamp and scanning the stream bottom within the
delineated area at night, turning over all large rocks and
cobbles and counting all crayfish on the stream bottom.
The P. clarkii density estimate was 3.7 ± 1.2 individuals
m-2 (mean ± 1 SE) over the two sampling occasions,
agreeing with estimates obtained in other years (Klose
2007). Fish species occurring in the study reach, based on
minnow trap catches (20 baited traps set out overnight;
each 42 cm long 9 23 cm diameter, with a 4-cm-deep
funnel) and direct observations, included threespine stickleback
(Gasterosteus aculeatus L.), arroyo chub (Gila
orcuttii Eigenmann and Eigenmann), prickly sculpin
(Cottus asper Richardson), and rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss Walbaum).
Waiau Stream
Fieldwork was conducted during September 2004 in Waiau
Stream, a second-order stream on the island of Hawaii,
located 5 km east of the Hilo Forest Reserve. Waiau Stream
flows eastward 3.5 km before discharging into Hilo Bay.
The stream is slightly alkaline (pH 7.6) and oligotrophic
(NO3
- = 9.1 lmol L-1, SRP = 1.7 lmol L-1). During
the 12-day study period, the study reach was 10–11 m wide,
average water depths were 0.35 m in riffles and 1.5 m in
pools, current velocities ranged from 0 to 100 cm s-1 and
water temperatures from 20 to 23 C, and stream substrata
were diverse, including bedrock and basaltic boulders in
riffles, and coarse gravel and small cobbles in pools.
Riparian canopy cover was 68 % and represented by guava
(Psidium guajava L.), hau (H. tiliaceus), bamboo (S. glaucifolium),
siris (Albizia lebbeck (L.) Benth.), false heather
(Cuphea hyssopifolia Kunth) and Job’s tears (Coix lacrymajobi
L.). Spirogyra was the dominant filamentous algal
genus present, microalgae included epilithic diatoms,
and the benthic invertebrate community was comprised
of worms (oligochaetes, nematodes, and polychaetes),
flatworms (Dugesia sp.), microcrustaceans (ostracods,
copepods, chydorid cladocerans), and introduced caddisflies
(Hydropsychidae: Cheumatopsyche pettiti (Banks),
Hydroptilidae: Oxyethira mira (Morton) and Hydroptila
arctia (Ross)). Decapod and fish species present included
Tahitian prawns (Macrobrachium lar J.C. Fabricius), red
swamp crayfish (P. clarkii), mountain shrimp (A. bisulcata),
and guppies (Poecilia reticulata Peters). Based on one
night’s visual survey (using methods described previously
for the Ventura River), and another survey that included
hand-netting and mark–recapture methods (Ricker 1975),
P. clarkii average density was calculated to be 1.2 ± 0.3
crayfish m-2 and A. bisulcata density was estimated to be
22 ± 7.5 shrimp m-2.
Experimental methods
Ventura River
Sixteen parallel stream channels constructed from polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) pipe cut longitudinally in half were
placed in a low velocity riffle in an unshaded stream reach
with high background densities of adult crayfish, with
channel environments closely mimicking the biotic and
abiotic (e.g., water temperature, substrata) conditions in the
reach. Two (2 m long 9 0.31 m wide 9 0.15 m high)
stream channels were mounted onto each of eight
1.2 9 2.4 m plywood sheets coated with water resistant
Varathane, which were then placed on the stream bottom.
The channel top edges protruded 2–3 cm above the water’s
surface and the ends of each channel were fitted with
plastic screens (0.3 cm mesh width) which were cleaned
daily, allowing continuous water flow and colonization by
invertebrates while preventing the escape or entry of
crayfish and snails. Natural substrata from an area of
stream bed equal to the total area of all channels combined
were elutriated to separate invertebrates from substrata,
then substrata were scrubbed and carefully selected to
mimic natural stream conditions, with an equal number of
very small (24), small (12), medium (5), and large (3)
substrata placed into each channel (mean circumferences 7,
21, 36, and 58 cm, respectively), along with sand and
gravel to an average depth of 2.5 cm. Four open-ended
PVC cylinders (20 cm long 9 8 cm diameter) were placed
on the bottom of each stream channel at equally spaced
intervals to provide shelter for crayfish and reduce intraspecific
interactions. Current velocities within each channel
ranged from 0 to 3 cm s-1. Invertebrates and algae collected
from the elutriated substrata were combined, mixed
thoroughly in a bucket, then equal aliquots were added to
each stream channel, ensuring that initial abundances
of invertebrates and algae were similar among enclosures.
Square unglazed ceramic tiles (2.3 cm on each
side 9 0.5 cm thick) were placed on the stream bed for
4 weeks for periphyton colonization, then 25 preconditioned
tiles were placed along the bottom of each stream
channel at equally spaced intervals at the beginning of
the experiment. A standardized mass of Cladophora
(81.2 ± 2.85 g wet mass) was bound and tethered in the
center of each channel, producing Cladophora coverage
similar to that measured in the Ventura River (Klose,
unpublished data). We have often observed P. clarkii
actively foraging in the Ventura River and similar nearby
streams, often in stagnant pools during the summer and fall
dry season, at depths similar to those in our stream channels
both at night and during the day (Klose and Cooper
2012).
Four treatments were randomly assigned to channels
with each replicated four times in a fully factorial design as
follows: P. clarkii only (2 crayfish per channel, 3.2 crayfish
m-2), P. gyrina only (100 snails per channel,
127 snails m-2), both P. clarkii and P. gyrina (2 crayfish
and 100 snails per channel), and neither P. clarkii or
P. gyrina (control). All individual crayfish were of similar
length and mass (8.8 ± 0.14 cm TL and 22.3 ± 1.3 g wet
mass). Natural densities of P. gyrina ranged from 0 to
321 snails m-2 (9.9 ± 0.25 mm TL) (Klose, unpublished
data). Channel tops were covered with thin, transparent
netting (0.4 cm mesh) and secured every 10 cm with
removable metal clips to exclude avian and mammalian
predators and to prevent crayfish and snail escape. Light
levels measured as photosynthetically active radiation
(PAR) were recorded below the water’s surface within each
stream channel, both with and without the netting in place,
producing an estimate of the amount of light reduction by
the netting of 4.5 %.
Day and night visual surveys were performed 5 days
following the start of the experiment in channels which
contained snails to determine the number of P. gyrina on
the tops of substrata, on the walls of stream channels both
above and below the water line, and on crayfish shelters.
Two researchers counted all snails on each of these surfaces,
and data from the two observers were averaged.
Night visual counts were conducted using flashlights and
began 1 h after sunset (2115 hours PST) and were completed
at 2300 hours. Four ceramic tiles were collected at
the beginning and end of the experiment from each channel
for periphyton biomass estimates [as ash free dry mass
(AFDM) and chlorophyll a concentrations], then frozen on
return to the laboratory. Initial invertebrate densities were
sampled using a 0.041-m2 Surber sampler (250 lm mesh
size, 3 Surber samples per channel), and final sampling was
performed by washing the entire contents of each stream
channel into a 250-lm mesh drift net at the channel outflow.
Invertebrate samples were preserved in the field in
75 % ethanol. All crayfish were recovered at the end of the
experiment.
Waiau Stream
Sixteen cylindrical plastic containers (0.30 m diameter
9 0.37 m high) were placed 8 cm apart on the stream
bottom along a pool-riffle transition zone at a water depth
of 30 cm, and covered with transparent netting (0.4 cm
mesh width). Each container had 20 holes (0.7 cm diameter)
on opposite sides toward the top which allowed
continuous water flow through the containers. Current
velocities within each enclosure ranged from 0 to
1 cm s-1. Elutriated stream gravel to a depth of 5 cm and
ten small, three medium, and one large cobble (circumferences
5, 10, and 22 cm, respectively) from the streambed
were placed on the bottom of each enclosure. One
open-ended PVC cylinder (13 cm long 9 4 cm diameter)
was placed on the bottom of each enclosure as a crayfish
refuge, then enclosures were stocked with natural densities
of benthic invertebrates and algae collected from Waiau
Stream using the same procedures described for the Ventura
River study.
The presence and absence of P. clarkii and A. bisulcata
were manipulated in enclosures in a factorial design
with each treatment being replicated four times: one
P. clarkii only (14 crayfish m-2), three A. bisulcata only
(42 shrimp m-2), both P. clarkii and A. bisulcata (1 crayfish
and 3 shrimp), and neither P. clarkii or A. bisulcata
(control). The density of crayfish used in the enclosures
was higher than natural densities; however, it was impossible
to add fewer than one crayfish per enclosure. All
experimental crayfish were of similar length and mass
(7.4 ± 0.24 cm TL and 15.1 ± 1.4 g wet mass, respectively),
and A. bisulcata averaged 3.6 ± 0.1 cm TL. All
P. clarkii were recovered at the end of the experiment.
To examine the effects of consumers on periphyton
biomass, two initial and two final periphyton samples were
collected from the top of a cobble placed in each experimental
container by scrubbing, brushing, and washing a
6.2-cm2 cobble area into a pan of water, then filtering the
suspension through A/E filters which were frozen for later
analysis. Hibiscus and Schizostachyum leaf packs (initial
wet masses 4.2 ± 0.18 and 1.8 ± 0.05 g, respectively) and
a clump of the filamentous green alga, Spirogyra (initial
wet mass 3.8 ± 0.07 g) were bound and tethered to the
bottom of each enclosure and weighed at the beginning and
end of the experiment, including any loose fragments
observed at the end of the experiment. Invertebrates were
sampled at the end of the experiment by washing and
elutriating all substrata in each container through a 250-lm
mesh net, then preserving samples in 75 % ethanol.
Laboratory methods
Invertebrates were identified to the lowest practical taxonomic
level (generally family or genus for insects and
mollusks, coarser levels for other taxa) and counted under a
dissecting microscope at 912 magnification. Average
individual dry mass for each taxon within each channel was
determined by averaging the lengths of ten individuals of
each taxon from each channel which were measured to the
nearest 0.01 mm using digital calipers, then calculating dry
weights using length–weight relationships (Meyer 1989).
Invertebrate taxa were assigned to functional feeding or
size categories, including herbivores/detritivores, predatory
invertebrates, meiofauna, and filter feeders using designations
in Merritt and Cummins (1996) and Thorpe and
Covich (2001) (ESM Appendices D, E). Owing to their
broad range of feeding modes and diets, Chironominae
(here Chironominae and Orthocladiinae combined) were
excluded from functional feeding group categorizations,
but chironomids belonging to the Tanypodinae were treated
separately as small predators. Chironomids (Chironominae,
Orthocladiinae), however, were included in total
invertebrate density and biomass calculations.
Ceramic tiles from the Ventura River experiment were
brushed clean and rinsed with distilled water. The resulting
slurry was split into two equal aliquots which were filtered
onto separate A/E filters, then stored at -20 C until AFDM
and chlorophyll a determinations. In both experiments, filters
were extracted at 4 C in 90 % acetone for 24 h, then
chlorophyll a concentrations were measured by fluorometry
using the acidification method (Sartory and Grobbelaar
1986). For AFDM analysis, samples were dried at 60 C for
24 h, weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg, then reweighed following
combustion at 500 C for 2 h. AFDM was determined
as the difference between initial and final dry weight
following ignition (Steinman and Lamberti 1996).
Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were conducted using the mean value
for each response variable from each stream channel or
enclosure as a replicate value. We compared the final mean
levels of chlorophyll a, AFDM, and inorganic sediment in
control treatments of the Ventura River and Waiau Stream
using Student’s t tests (n = 4 from each stream). Effects of
treatment on initial chlorophyll a and AFDM levels, and
initial masses of filamentous algae and leaf packs, were
determined using two-way ANOVAs. If no initial differences
between treatments were detected then the final
effects of treatments were determined by applying two-way
ANOVAs to final response variable values only. If there
were significant associations between treatment and initial
levels of these variables, then two-way ANOVAs were
performed on proportional changes (final/initial) in the
values of these variables. Independent variables in all twoway
ANOVAs were the presence versus absence of crayfish
and snails (Ventura River) or shrimp (Waiau Stream).
In the Ventura River study, where the densities and microdistributions
(proportion observed above the water line)
of snails were monitored during the day and night, the
effects of crayfish and time of day on P. gyrina densities
and microdistributions were evaluated using repeated
measures ANOVAs.
Prior to all analyses, normality was tested using the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test and residuals from analyses
were plotted and examined. If assumptions of normality
and homogeneity of variances could not be met, then values
of count or continuous variables were log10-transformed.
When variables included zero values, then one or
the smallest detectable unit for that response variable was
added to all values for that variable prior to transformation
(Quinn and Keough 2002). All statistical analyses were
performed with JMP v.6.0.0 for WindowsTM (SAS Institute,
Cary, NC, USA).


xresults
Ventura River
In general, our enclosure experiment supported some but not
all of our predictions of crayfish effects on components of
the California stream food web.We hypothesized that, in the
absence of crayfish, snails would reduce periphyton biomass
(as chlorophyll a and AFDM), and inorganic sediment
levels, but that crayfish, when present, would reduce snails
which would release periphyton from grazing pressure,
leading to increases in periphyton biomass. These predictions
were supported by the experimental results, because
snails significantly reduced periphyton and sediment levels
when crayfish were absent, crayfish reduced snail densities
and drove them into refugia above the water line, particularly
at night, and periphyton biomass and sediment levels
were higher in the presence than absence of crayfish when
snails were present (Figs. 2, 3; Table 1). Although crayfish
reduced periphyton and sediment levels, their effects were
not nearly as pronounced as those for snails, and periphyton
biomass and sediment levels were similar in treatments with
crayfish regardless of the presence of snails (Fig. 2). Further,
in support of our predictions, crayfish, but not snails,
significantly reduced the biomass of Cladophora (Fig. 2;
Table 1; ESM Appendix A).
Invertebrate biomass and abundance across all treatments
in the Ventura River were dominated by Chironominae
(51 % of total biomass, 15 % of total density),
Ostracoda (11, 31 %), Cyclopoida (8.1, 28 %), Wormaldia
(7.1,\1 %), and Baetis tricaudatus (6.2 %, 1.2 %). Herbivores/
detritivores comprised 16 %, predatory invertebrates
1.1 %, meiofauna 24.2 %, and filter feeders 7.1 % of
total invertebrate biomass and 13.6, 0.05, 71.1, and 0.16 %,
respectively, of total invertebrate density (ESM Appendix
D). There were significant crayfish 9 snail interaction
effects on the biomasses of total invertebrates, filter feeders,
and Chironominae, and densities of Chironominae,
because levels of these variables were higher in the snail
alone and crayfish alone treatments than in the control or
crayfish ? snail treatments (Table 2). Crayfish reductions
of the densities of predatory invertebrates (i.e., Tanypodinae,
Graptocorixa, Enallagma) were marginally significant
(Fig. 4; ESM Appendices B, D). Other feeding groups or
size categories, such as total invertebrate and filter feeder
densities, herbivore/detritivore and meiofauna biomasses
and densities, and taxon diversity, richness and evenness
were unaffected by treatment (ESM Appendices B, D).
Waiau Stream
We predicted that crayfish effects on periphyton biomass
and inorganic sediment levels when alone would be minimal
owing to low periphyton and sediment levels in this
shaded stream, and that crayfish consumption would be
directed at more abundant resources such as filamentous
algae, leaf litter, and benthic invertebrates. Many of our
predictions were confirmed because crayfish had no effects
on periphyton and sediment levels, but reduced filamentous
algae, benthic invertebrate, and leaf litter levels (Figs. 5, 6;
ESM Appendices A, C). However, we also hypothesized
that shrimp would reduce periphyton, filamentous algae,
and sediment levels, and that crayfish, when present, would
consume shrimp leading to increases in the levels of these
variables. Somewhat contrary to our predictions, shrimp
had no significant effect on periphyton biomass, but did
marginally reduce sediment levels and Spirogyra biomass
(Fig. 5; Table 1; ESM Appendix A). Regarding the
hypothesized trophic cascade, we found that crayfish had
no effect on shrimp density, that there were no effects of
shrimp or crayfish, alone and together, on periphyton
biomass, and that crayfish caused larger reductions in filamentous
algae biomass than did shrimp, but that average
sediment levels were marginally higher in the presence
versus absence of crayfish when shrimp were present
(Fig. 5; Table 1; ESM Appendix A).
More specifically, final numbers of shrimp remaining in
enclosures at the end of the experiment were not significantly
different between treatments with and without
crayfish (shrimp density when alone 35 ± 7.1 m-2; shrimp
density with crayfish 28 ± 5.8 m-2; mean ± 1 SE) (t test
comparing shrimp vs. crayfish ? shrimp treatments: t =
-0.77, P = 0.50). Invertebrate biomass and density were
dominated by Oligochaeta (65 % of total biomass, 27 % of
total density), Hydrachna (8.9, 9.1 %), Ostracoda (8.1,
25 %), C. pettiti (7.7, \1 %), and Dugesia (4.3, 1.3 %).
Herbivores/detritivores comprised 67.4 %, predatory
invertebrates 4.7 %, meiofauna 20.2 %, filter feeders
7.8 %, and Chironominae\1 % of total invertebrate biomass
and 28.1, 1.4, 69.7,\1, and\1 %, respectively, of
total invertebrate density (ESM Appendix E). As predicted
from the known feeding habits of crayfish and A. bisulcata,
total invertebrate and herbivore/detritivore biomasses and
densities (primarily oligochaetes) were reduced by crayfish,
but not by shrimp (Fig. 6; Table 2; ESM Appendix C).
Both crayfish and shrimp appeared to marginally reduce
predatory invertebrate (primarily flatworm) levels, but their
effects when together were similar to their individual
effects when alone (Fig. 6; ESM Appendix C). Taxon
diversity, richness, and evenness, and the biomasses and
densities of Chironominae and meiofauna were unaffected
by treatment (Fig. 6; ESM Appendix E).

xdiscussion
The results of this study provide experimental support for
the hypothesis that the biological and physical characteristics
of recipient ecosystems, such as autochthonous
production and allochthonous input rates, and consumer
behavioral characteristics, drive an invasive omnivore’s
consumption patterns, ultimately influencing food web
structure and function. Based on literature information, we
predicted that crayfish would primarily affect components
of an algae-based food web in an open California stream
but components of a detritus-based food web in a shaded
Hawaiian stream. More specifically, we predicted that
crayfish would have strong effects on filamentous algae,
periphyton (diatoms), sediment, total invertebrates, and
snails in the Ventura River, and strong effects on shrimp,
total invertebrates, filamentous algae, and leaf litter, but
weak effects on periphyton, in Waiau Stream. We also
predicted that snails and shrimp would reduce periphyton
and sediment levels and that the addition of crayfish would
reduce these primary consumers leading to increases in
periphyton and sediment levels. Finally, we expected that,
among invertebrates, crayfish would have the greatest
impacts on large, slow-moving or sedentary prey because
these prey are easiest to catch and handle.
There was mixed confirmation for our predictions. In
this study, crayfish reduced large, slow-moving invertebrates
(e.g., snails, odonates, oligochaetes) and had few
effects on active, mobile prey (e.g., shrimp, amphipods,
baetid mayflies), consistent with literature data indicating
that large, slow-moving or sedentary prey are most vulnerable
to crayfish predation (Lodge et al. 1994; Parkyn
et al. 1997; Nystro¨m et al. 1999; Klose and Cooper 2012).
We predicted that crayfish would reduce snails in California
and shrimp in Hawaii (Banha and Anasta´cio 2011;
Klose 2011; Klose and Cooper 2012). Consistent with the
literature, we found that crayfish reduced the abundance
and altered the microdistribution of snails in the California
stream (Lodge et al. 1994; Nystro¨m et al. 1999; Klose
2011); however, crayfish had no significant effects on the
densities of the endemic mountain atyid shrimp in Hawaii.
This contrast between crayfish effects on primary consumers
in California versus Hawaii likely arose from differences
in the vulnerabilities of fast-moving, evasive
shrimp versus slow-moving snails to crayfish predation.
Crayfish in California, and both crayfish and shrimp in
Hawaii, marginally reduced the biomass or density of
large, slow-moving predatory invertebrates, primarily odonates
in California and flatworms in Hawaii, congruent
with the results of previous experiments conducted in
southern California (Klose and Cooper 2012). In contrast,
total invertebrate and small herbivore/detritivore biomass
and abundance were reduced by crayfish in Hawaii but not
California, presumably because the dominant herbivores/
detritivores were large oligochaetes in Hawaii, but smaller
chironomids in California (chironomid mean length
6.4 ± 0.12 mm). In addition, oligochaetes were larger in
Waiau Stream than the Ventura River (mean length
8.5 ± 1.4 vs. 5.2 ± 0.09 mm, respectively; t test: t =
-1.95, P\0.05), perhaps accounting for differences in the
susceptibilities of this taxon to crayfish predation. Further,
oligochaetes may have occupied refugia by burrowing into
sand in California, but remained vulnerable to crayfish
among the coarser substrata found in the Hawaiian stream.
Literature data also indicate that crayfish switch from
feeding on large, slow-moving invertebrates to filamentous
algae, then smaller invertebrates, and finally microalgae as
preferred food sources become scarce (Dorn and Wojdak
2004). As predicted, crayfish in the Ventura River, and
both crayfish and shrimp in Waiau Stream, reduced the
biomass of filamentous algae, similar to previous findings
(Hart 1992; Creed 1994; Dorn and Wojdak 2004). Consumption
of filamentous algae by decapods can have many
repercussions for stream communities, including reductions
in the abundance of invertebrates associated with
filamentous algae, increases in the abundance of sedentary
invertebrate taxa competing with algae for attachment
space, and increases in the biomass of microalgae (Creed
1994; Schofield et al. 2008; Klose and Cooper 2012). We
did not observe such indirect effects of crayfish on other
components of these stream communities; however,
we tethered small amounts of filamentous algae in our
enclosures, which replicated natural macroalgal cover in
the streams but which may have may have resulted in
muted indirect effects mediated through macroalgae compared
to systems where substrata were covered or dominated
by filamentous algae. In contrast to shrimp effects in
Hawaii, we found that snails had no direct effects on filamentous
algae biomass in the California stream, presumably
because large filamentous algae are not easily handled
or ingested by snails and, in some cases, may even benefit
from snail removal of epiphytic diatoms attached to macroalgal
filaments (Sarnelle et al. 1993).
Although leaf litter was largely absent from the Ventura
River, it was abundant in Waiau Stream and, as hypothesized,
crayfish reduced hau and bamboo leaf litter in the
Hawaiian stream. Other studies have shown that crayfish
can reduce leaf litter in a variety of stream systems, often
being the dominant shredders in systems with substantial
allochthonous inputs (Usio 2000; Schofield et al. 2001;
Zhang et al. 2004). Native shredders are largely absent in
Hawaiian streams, and the invasive red swamp crayfish is
often the sole shredder currently found in Hawaiian
freshwaters (Larned et al. 2003). Shredders, such as crayfish,
directly consume leaf material, reduce organic particle
size, and enhance benthic organic matter accumulation
(Gulis and Suberkropp 2003; Zhang et al. 2004). Because
oligochaetes consume primarily fine particulate organic
matter, their dominance in Waiau Stream may stem from
the accumulation of benthic organic matter in this system;
however, they appeared to be vulnerable to crayfish
predation.
Although we predicted that crayfish would reduce benthic
invertebrates in both systems, this outcome was only
observed in Waiau Stream. Total invertebrate, filter feeder,
and Chironominae biomass, and Chironominae density,
were higher in the crayfish alone and snail alone treatments
than in the control and crayfish ? snail treatments in the
Ventura River. The mechanisms responsible for these
results are unclear; however, it is possible that these taxa
may have benefited from the effects of ecosystem engineering
via the reduction of sediment levels by crayfish and
snails, but with the reduction of sediment levels by snails
rendering these taxa vulnerable to crayfish predation when
both snails and crayfish were present (March et al. 2002;
Mermillod-Blondin et al. 2004). That alteration of sediments
by snails and crayfish may have been responsible, at
least partly, for the observed responses of these invertebrates
to treatment as supported by a negative relationship
between total invertebrate biomass and sediment mass
(Pearson’s r = -0.56; P = 0.03). Crayfish effects on
chironomid abundance reported in the literature have been
inconsistent (Creed and Reed 2004; Usio and Townsend
2004; Nystro¨m 2005; Klose and Cooper 2012), and in this
study ranged from complex effects in the Ventura River to
no effects in Waiau Stream; however, chironomids were
rare in Waiau Stream.
Crayfish reduced periphyton and sediment levels in the
Ventura River, but not in Waiau Stream, presumably
because of low microalgae and sediment levels and the
abundance of alternative food sources (oligochaetes, leaf
litter, filamentous algae) in Waiau Stream, consistent with
our predictions of different crayfish effects on algal-based
versus detrital-based food webs. Although we previously
observed, and therefore predicted, that crayfish would
decrease total invertebrate biomass and taxon diversity in
the Ventura River (Klose and Cooper 2012), we did not
observe these crayfish effects on these invertebrate variables
in this study. In our previous field experiment in the
Ventura River, crayfish reduced periphyton biomass and
inorganic sediment, with resultant reductions in the
abundance of the meiofauna; however, filamentous algae
and snails were largely absent from experimental enclosures
(Klose and Cooper 2012; see also Hart 1992; Creed
and Reed 2004). In the results reported here, the addition
of filamentous algae (Cladophora) and snails to experimental
arenas apparently resulted in less pronounced
effects of crayfish on periphyton biomass, sediment, and
associated invertebrates (e.g., meiofauna) (Luttenton et al.
1998).
We also predicted that trophic or behavioral cascades
would be observed in both systems, with crayfish-induced
reductions in snail or shrimp densities or activity resulting
in increases in algal and sediment levels (Fig. 1; Lodge
et al. 1994; James et al. 2000). Such cascades assume that
dominant primary consumers greatly reduce algal and
sediment levels. In the Ventura River, snails greatly
reduced periphyton and sediment levels, but had no effects
on filamentous algae (see above), whereas in the Waiau
Stream, shrimp had no effects on periphyton biomass, but
marginally reduced sediment and filamentous algae levels.
In California, crayfish greatly reduced snail densities and
forced snails into refugia above the water line, precluding
their grazing on periphyton, so sediment and periphyton
levels increased when crayfish were present. In contrast, we
observed no evidence for cascades in the Hawaiian stream,
presumably because shrimp had no effects on periphyton
biomass and because crayfish did not reduce shrimp densities.
Although sediment levels were marginally higher
where both shrimp and crayfish were present than where
only shrimp were present, this did not appear to have an
effect on algal or invertebrate abundances. Finally, it might
be predicted that the addition of crayfish would reduce
shrimp consumption of filamentous algae (Spirogyra),
leading to higher filamentous algae biomass where crayfish
and shrimp were found together than where shrimp were
found alone; however, the negative impacts of crayfish on
filamentous algae biomass appeared to be stronger than the
impacts of shrimp on this resource.
Although crayfish densities and the size and shape of
experimental units used in the Ventura River and Waiau
Stream were different, the results indicate that comparisons
of crayfish effects on these two systems are valid. Klose
and Cooper (2012) and Matsuzaki et al. (2009) found
negative exponential relationships between invertebrate
densities and macrophyte biomass, respectively, and crayfish
density, suggesting that crayfish effects may have been
similar across the range of crayfish densities used in our
Californian and Hawaiian experiments. Similarly, McCarthy
et al. (2006) found that crayfish effects on invertebrate
taxa (i.e., gastropods, odonates, trichopterans, and amphipods)
could be extrapolated accurately from small cages
(0.2–4.7 m2) with high crayfish densities (0.8–30 individuals
m-2) to whole lakes. These experimental scales and
crayfish densities were comparable to those used in our
studies (arena size 0.07 and 0.62 m2, crayfish densities 14
and 3.2 m-2 in Hawaii and California, respectively). Further,
dominant crayfish food resources present in both systems
were slow-moving or sedentary, including periphyton,
filamentous algae, and chironomids in the Ventura River,
and periphyton, filamentous algae, leaf litter, and oligochaetes
in Waiau Stream. The design of enclosures limited
resource exchange between the inside and outside of
experimental arenas, with exchange points limited to fine
mesh at the ends of long, rectangular channels (Ventura
River) or to a limited number of small holes bored into the
sides of cylindrical enclosures (Waiau Stream). Because
there was limited or no exchange of these resources between
the inside and outside of enclosures, crayfish effects would
have been affected minimally by resource exchange rates
(Englund et al. 2001). In addition, the sizes of end meshes or
side holes of enclosures in both streams were fine enough to
retain snails in California and atyid shrimp in Hawaii, so
experiments constituted closed predation trials for these
taxa, showing crayfish impacts on their populations in the
absence of prey migration.
Assessments of the effects of a top invasive omnivore on
resources in different streams systems (temperate mainland
vs. tropical island) represent an important step in developing
predictive models of crayfish impacts on different
freshwater ecosystems. We suggest that predicting the net
effects of omnivorous invaders on native communities, as
well as determining the precise mechanisms for these
effects, will remain difficult until we determine the vulnerability
of different food types and species to invasive
taxa as well as the precise composition of the recipient
communities. Although short-term food preference trials
appear to provide a reliable guide to the immediate effects
of an invasive omnivore on native communities, flexibility
in the omnivore’s food habits, changing food resource
conditions, and longer term and larger scale prey responses
to omnivores (e.g., shrimp moving into riffles and runs
where fast current speeds exclude crayfish) may make the
predictions of long-term impacts problematic.