xabstract
The common carp Cyprinus carpio, a worldwide introduced benthivorous fi sh, has been implicated
in the degradation of native environments through initiation of a shift to a phytoplankton-dominated turbid state,
which is associated with dramatic biodiversity loss. This study combined surveys of ponds containing either low
total biomass of small-sized carp or high densities of large-sized carp with an enclosure/exclosure experiment, in
order to quantify the direct (trophic) and indirect (via habitat deterioration) impacts of carp on pond communities.
High-density ponds supported substantially lower biodiversity and were more turbid than low-density ponds. The
subsequent fi eld experiment examined the effects of carp presence/absence and of clear-water versus moderately
turbid conditions mediated by carp on the survival to metamorphosis of larval anurans Pelobates fuscus and Hyla
arborea, on Zygoptera and Anisoptera densities, and on the biomass of submerged macrophytes. The presence of
enclosed one-year old carp resulted in the complete elimination of larval anurans and the absence of Odonata. The
effects of the habitat conditions were not signifi cant, apart from better survival of P. fuscus in the moderately turbid
carp exclosures than in clear water. Submerged plants were more abundant in clear-water than in turbid treatments,
with a negligible effect of enclosures/exclosures. These results suggest that carp predation and related effects may
be primarily responsible for animal diversity loss in invaded communities, as they may act prior to, or independent
of, the ecosystem switch to a turbid phase.

xintroduction
Common carp Cyprinus carpio is one of the most
widely distributed fi sh species in the world. Carp is believed
to be native to Eastern Europe and central Asia,
but it has been successfully introduced into all continents
except Antarctica, both into natural waters and
as a cultivated species (Welcomme 1988). High tolerance
to environmental stress and omnivorous feeding
habits make carp not only an attractive subject of commercial
aquaculture, but also highly invasive on many
continents. Non-native carp have been implicated in
the degradation of aquatic ecosystems and are considered
to belong to the most ecologically harmful freshwater
invasive species (e.g. Crivelli 1983, Zambrano et
al. 1999, Koehn 2003). In eutrophic shallow lakes and
ponds, after reaching a critical density, carp may mediate
a transition from clear-water, macrophyte-dominated
conditions to a turbid state with abundant phytoplankton
(Scheffer 1990, Zambrano et al. 2001). The
carp’s bottom feeding mode, suctioning food organisms
together with the sediment, and ejecting the unsuitable
material (Lammens & Hoogenboezem 1991),
may result in the uprooting or ingestion of submerged
aquatic vegetation, elevated nutrient and turbidity levels
(Cline et al. 1994, Zambrano et al. 1999, Miller &
Crowl 2006) and the physical resuspension of settled
algal cells from the sediment (Roozen et al. 2007). In
addition, carp may excrete large quantities of bioavailable
nutrients to the water column, thus accelerating
algal production (Qin & Threlked 1990, Richardson
et al. 1990, Matsuzaki et al. 2007). The carp is able to
attain large body size, and its impact on aquatic communities
seems to depend largely on traits associated
with individual size (Sidorkewicj et al. 1998, Parkos et
al. 2003, Driver et al. 2005).
Despite the uncertainty of the interplay of causal
mechanisms, a turbid state under carp impact is
clearly characterized by a dramatic loss of biodiversity
(reviewed in Chumchal & Drenner 2004, Bajer
et al. 2009). The impact of non-native carp on aquatic
communities has been assumed to be primarily
through habitat modifi cation (e.g. Welcomme 1988,
Driver et al. 2005, Matsuzaki et al. 2007). Acting as
an ‘ecosystem engineer’ (Jones et al. 1994, Matsuzaki
et al. 2007), an effi cient modifi er of abiotic factors,
carp may affect habitat conditions without strong
trophic interactions with other community members.
The alternative pathway of carp impact on biodiversity
is through direct trophic effects via predation or
competition (Weber & Brown 2009). Zooplankton and
benthic invertebrate assemblages are likely to be regulated
by carp predation (Richardson et al. 1990, Wilcox
& Hornbach 1991, Zambrano & Hinojosa 1999,
Miller & Crowl 2006). However, little is known on the
mechanisms of carp impact on the broader spectrum
of aquatic macrozoa. The carp has a diverse diet, but
with its slow approach to food and lacking oral teeth,
it is perceived as not morphologically adapted to hunt
after mobile, evasive prey (Sibbing 1988, Lammens &
Hoogenboezem 1991). Earlier studies have experimentally
separated effects related to bioturbation from the
remaining carp effects (Qin & Threlkeld 1990, Matsuzaki
et al. 2007), but no research has attempted to ascertain
the relative magnitudes of top-down (through
predation or competition) and bottom-up (via environment
alteration reducing nutrient availability to higher
trophic levels) effects of carp on animal communities
other than benthic invertebrates (for a review see Weber
& Brown 2009). Such insights may greatly help in
understanding and predicting community processes in
carp-invaded systems.
Here I have used a cross-scale approach, combining
the results of pond surveys performed as background
research on a large spatial scale with manipulative
data from small-scale fi eld experiments. The study
was conducted at semi-natural carp ponds, stocked
separately with fi sh age (size)-classes, where previous
research had established strong effects of carp agecohorts
on abundance of amphibians and aquatic macroinvertebrates
(Kloskowski 2010, Kloskowski et al
2010). The surveys showed that ponds with relatively
low total biomass of young-of-the-year (small-sized)
carp, which supported comparatively diverse macroinvertebrate
and amphibian communities, had clear-water
macrophyte-rich conditions in comparison to highdensity
ponds stocked with older (larger) carp, which
were more turbid. Subsequently, an in situ enclosure/
exclosure experiment was performed to separate the
direct (trophic) and indirect (via habitat deterioration)
effects of carp on the survival to metamorphosis of
larval anurans. The effects of the presence/absence of
one-year old carp in fi eld cages were crossed with the
effects of habitat conditions mediated by carp at different
densities and individual size. In the same experiment
carp effects on Odonata, the most abundant
macroinvertebrate group in the cages, and the abundance
of submersed macrophytes were investigated.

xmethods
Pond surveys
Background data on carp impact on pond communities were
collected at extensively managed carp ponds in SE Poland,
where invertebrate and amphibian communities were investigated
over different years between 2002–2007 (Kloskowski
2009, Kloskowski 2010, Kloskowski et al. 2010). Traditional
carp monoculture provides simple aquatic systems in which
fi sh are the major structuring factor of the community (cf. Haas
et al. 2007, Kloskowski 2009). The man-made, drainable pond
systems are amenable to standardized fi eld manipulations and
large-scale replication of semi-experimental work over time.
The ponds studied (in total 651–682 ha of water surface area)
belonged to six pond clusters situated 10–60 km apart in the
vicinity of the city of Lublin (51° 13′ N, 22° 33′ E). The ponds
were similar in most respects (typically with a sloping bottom
and mean water depth values varying from 0.7 m to 1.3 m over
the growing season). However, they differed in size (from 1 ha
to 69 ha) and in the coverage of emergent aquatic vegetation
(range 5–68 %).
Three carp age classes were stocked in separate ponds:
young-of-the-year (0+) carp, carp after fi rst wintering (1+) and
2-years old carp (2+). At stocking in spring (late April–early
May) and at draining of ponds in September-October, all carp
in each pond were weighed to establish the total biomass, and
a large sample of fi sh was weighed to assess mean individual
biomass. This allowed estimation of total fi sh numbers and of
seasonal mortality rates in the growing season. In most ponds,
net sampling was conducted twice a month, starting from June,
to check fi sh growth. Body length estimates were obtained using
length-weight regressions established from carp samples
collected in the study ponds. 0+ carp were stocked as larvae
at the individual weight of 1.5–3.0 mg; 1+ carp were stocked
at ca. 30–50 g (ca 13–15 cm total length, TL) and 2+ carp at
ca. 150–250 g (18–22 cm). At the time of stocking, 0+ ponds
were practically fi shless (< 1 kg ha–1). However, until July 0+
carp attained an individual size of 6–10 g (7–9 cm in length)
at the total biomass > 50 kg ha–1 in all surveyed ponds. The
stocking densities at the 1+ and 2+ ponds were 170–240 kg
ha–1, comparable with those observed in European shallow
lakes (Scheffer 1998). Previous research has established that
0+ ponds and ponds with older and larger-sized (≥ 1+) carp differ
with regard to macroinvertebrate and amphibian densities,
whereas no signifi cant differences were found between 1+ and
2+ ponds (Kloskowski 2009, Kloskowski et al. 2010). Effects
of early carp developmental stages (< ca. 10 cm TL) on aquatic
communities differ from those of larger carp due to size-dependent
ability to penetrate deeper into the substratum (causing
stronger bioturbation) and to ontogenetic niche shifts; in addition,
carp effects are density-dependent, e.g. submerged macrophytes
can be heavily affected when carp biomass approaches
200 kg ha–1 (Sibbing 1988, Lammens & Hoogenboezem 1991,
Williams et al. 2002; reviewed in Weber & Brown 2009). The
roles of carp individual size and total stock biomass are diffi
cult to separate in ponds with age-structured fi sh stocks, because
although young-of-the-year fi sh can be stocked at much
higher numerical densities, the collective biomass of older carp
early in the growing season (in spring and early summer) is
naturally higher. Therefore, ponds containing the two older and
larger sized (TL > 10 cm) age classes were pooled as ‘high-carp
ponds’, i.e. large-sized fi sh at high density, and compared in the
analyses with 0+ ponds (hereafter ‘low-carp ponds’, i.e. smallsized
fi sh at low total biomass; see also Statistics). The collective
production of small-sized wild-grown fi sh that invaded the
ponds and species occasionally added in small numbers as supplemental
fi sh species (tench Tinca tinca, crucian carp Carassius
carassius, golden orfe Leuciscus idus, wels Silurus glanis,
pike Esox lucius) did not exceed 2–5 % of the fi nal fi sh production
per pond. In spring, dung from livestock and occasionally
liquid manure were added to the ponds in order to preclude
nutrient depletion. In June and July liming was conducted (ca
20 kg of calcium carbonate ha–1 monthly). 0+ fi sh since July
and ≥ 1+ cohorts since May were supplied with supplementary
food (cereal grains in an amount of 2–3 % of the estimated fi sh
biomass daily).
Based on data collected using funnel activity traps on
aquatic macroinvertebrates in 2002 and 2004 (Kloskowski
et al. 2010) and larval amphibians between 2005–2007 (Kloskowski
2010) taxonomic diversity of macroinvertebrates and
of amphibians in the studied ponds was quantifi ed using the
Shannon-Wiener index (H’). The index accounts for total number
of taxa, as well as for their evenness across the sampling
sites (Magurran 1988). Since the taxonomic composition of
macroinvertebrates caught in traps differed markedly between
the two sampling sessions (from 27 April till 8 May and between
23 June and 7 July in both years), H’ index (as applied
to the most commonly occurring taxonomic groups: Hirudinea,
Isopoda, Ephemeroptera, Zygoptera, Anisoptera, Corixidae,
Notonectidae, Naucoridae, Dytiscidae, ‘other Coleoptera’ and
Aranea) was calculated separately for the spring and summer
surveys. To index the density of individual anuran species in
the given pond the maximal number of larvae that had grown
at least to the developmental stage 25 (tooth rows developed;
the spiracle opening visible; Gosner 1960) captured on one
sampling occasion was used (a total of seven sampling sessions
per pond were conducted). Taxa involved in the Rana esculenta
complex (‘water frogs’) and ‘brown frogs’ (Rana temporaria
vs Rana arvalis) were grouped. Adult newts were included in
the analyses instead of larvae, because mainly adult individuals
were captured by the traps (Kloskowski 2010; see Kloskowski
2009 for a complete list of amphibian species detected in the
ponds).
The proportion of pond bottom covered by submerged macrophytes
was estimated as an index of submerged vegetation
abundance. The presence or absence of vegetation was recorded
within a 40 cm diameter circular frame at 50 locations every
10 m along 2–3 transects (dependent on the size of the ponds)
that intersected the pond. Sampling was conducted between
15 and 31 July in 2000 and 2001. In 2006 (23–24 July) and
2007 (18–19 July) water samples were collected for turbidity
and chlorophyll-a analyses and Secchi (12-cm disc) depth was
measured. The samples were collected at 1–2 m from the shoreline
vegetation at mid-depth. Turbidity was measured using a
Hach 2110 AN IS turbidimeter (HACH Co., Loveland, Colorado,
USA). Chlorophyll-a content as a proxy for phytoplankton
biomass was determined spectrophotometrically using ethanol
as the extractant. The age of the stocks was alternated in
30–60 % of the ponds each year and individual surveys were
performed in at least two years, in order to sample as many
of the same ponds containing fi sh at different size and density
as possible, so that carp effects were separated from individual
properties of the ponds.
Enclosure/exclosure experiments
To separate the direct and indirect effects of carp on survival
of larval amphibians, a total of 64 enclosures/exclosures
(1 m × 1 m screen cages) were used, of which half were fi shless
and half stocked with one 1+ carp. The experiment was replicated
in a 0+ and a 1+ pond where cages shared the environmental
conditions of the ambient habitat. The 0+ pond typifi ed
the clear-water state, while the 1+ pond was moderately turbid
(with higher turbidity, more abundant phytoplankton and lower
water transparency; Table 1). Two anuran species common in
the study area, Pelobates fuscus and Hyla arborea, were used
in the experiments. Each cage received 50 individuals of a single
species. For each species and treatment combination eight
replicates were used.
P. fuscus larvae were added to the cages on 7–8 May and
H. arborea on 10–11 June 2007. Larvae were transferred from
multiple clutches from two ponds in the study area, mixed and
randomly assigned to individual cages. At stocking, tadpoles
ranged in size from 13 to 14 mm of total length and at that body
size were highly mobile. Two days before adding the tadpoles
every second cage received one carp. Total length and mass of
carp were recorded before stocking and at the end of the experiment.
The size range of added fi sh was 13–14 cm TL (30–36 g)
at the commencement of the experiment and 15–17 cm TL
(49–71 g) at the end on 30 July. Carp densities were within the
ranges of those found in natural systems invaded by non-native
carp (Crivelli 1983). To avoid hunger stress the enclosed fi sh
were fed approximately 4 g commercial granulated feed (35 %
protein) weekly.
The cages were made of plastic mosquito net with mesh
size 1 mm. To ensure exchange of water and small-bodied organisms
through the walls, periphyton and adhering inorganic
sediment were scrubbed from the external sides of the walls
ca. every two weeks. Habitat conditions (for a list of measured
parameters see Table 1) were similar in and at haphazardly
selected sites outside, at a distance of 3–4 m from the cages,
irrespective of carp yearlings’ presence/absence in the cages,
except that turbidity was irregularly slightly higher (up to 6
FAU) in both fi shless and carp containing cages than in the
pond.
The two ponds selected for the experiment belonged to a
single pond cluster (51° 27′ 19″ N, 22° 25′ 16″ E). Biodiversity
and water-quality characteristics of both ponds were typical
for low-density ponds with small-sized carp and high-density
ponds with large carp, respectively (see Results and Table 1 on
strong differences in water quality between low-carp and highcarp
ponds). As pond history may be important for the occurrence
of invertebrate eggs in the sediment (see below) and the
development of submersed vegetation, both ponds held 0+ fi sh
in the preceding year. The cages were arranged parallel to the
shoreline in places free of emergent vegetation, each spaced at
least 1.5 m apart. At the time of starting the experiment there
was no observable plant seedling emergence in the cages. Water
depth was ca. 0.8 m. Cages were built without fl oors to allow
carp to forage in the substratum, but the top (ca 20 cm above the
water line) was covered with netting to prevent colonization by
potential predators and to retain metamorphosing amphibians.
Bottom edges were embedded 10–15 cm in the sediments. To
approximate natural habitat heterogeneity, three stems of Typha
sp. were stuck into the bottom of each cage and one wall hung
loosely forming a shallow pocket at the bottom as a structural
refuge from fi sh attacks.
Before stocking the tadpoles, their potential predators were
removed from the cages by exhaustive sweeping of a large fi nemeshed
net. Frequent repeated sampling of a block of cages
during a pilot study indicated that thorough netting of the cages
was effi cient in removing large predatory insects such as dragonfl
ies, but was not an effi cient measure to remove their earliest
developmental stages from the sediment layer or plant tissues.
At the end of the experiment, in over 70 % of the fi sh-free cages
Zygoptera and Anisoptera larvae and imagines were detected.
Moreover, a few cages were invaded by single Bombina bombina
larvae, which entered the cages at small size and outgrew the
mesh size. Larvae of all those taxa, with the exception of large
Anisoptera (Sympetrum sp. and Orthetrum sp.), were assumed
to be too small to exert a signifi cant competitive or predatory effect
on the focal tadpoles. Cages, where large Anisoptera were
detected (n = 13) were omitted from the analyses of tadpole
survival. Also, two cages were damaged shortly before the conclusion
of the experimental period (presumably by a muskrat
Ondatra zibethicus) and they were excluded from the analyses.
From late June onwards, the cages were checked at least
every two days for metamorphosed individuals. Metamorphlings
(with fully absorbed tail; stage 46 according to Gosner
1960) were weighed after drip-drying and released. On 30 July
the experiment was terminated and fi sh were retrieved from the
cages. Amphibians and odonate larvae were searched for by repeatedly
dip netting in the cage, including the sediment layer,
until no new individuals had been captured for 20 consecutive
sweeps in alternating directions. Odonate larvae and a few retrieved
tadpoles were counted. All submersed macrophytes
were collected from the cages. Macrophytes were washed over
a sieve to remove sediment and invertebrates, dried to a constant
weight at 60 °C, after which they were weighed to 0.001 g.
Analyses of Odonata densities and macrophyte biomass were
conducted only on data from cages stocked with P. fuscus, i.e.
those installed in May.
Statistics
As pond surveys involved repeated sampling across time and
sample sizes were not constant across both random and fi xed
terms, restricted (residual) maximum likelihood (REML, Gen-
Stat v. 9.0) analyses were conducted. As the years and sites
(pond clusters) over which the research was performed were not
chosen as a particular sample of years and sites and to account
for spatial non-independence of ponds from the same pond
clusters, year and pond identity (nested as pond/pond-cluster)
were specifi ed as random factors. Since total fi sh biomass was
strongly related to carp age/size, fi sh age/size and total biomass
were represented by a single categorical explanatory variable
(low-carp vs high-carp ponds) to prevent multicollinearity. The
other fi xed terms included in the analyses were pond surface
area (ha) and emergent macrophyte vegetation cover (determined
by digitization from aerial photographs of the ponds).
Variables were selected starting from a full model containing all
explanatory terms as well as the two-way interactions. A fi nal
model was then determined by step-wise dropping of the terms
in order of lowest effect size, starting with nonsignifi cant twoway
interactions. Wald statistics were used to identify signifi -
cant fi xed effects.
The probability of caged tadpole surviving to the end of the
trial was analysed using General Linear Models (GLM, Gen-
Stat v. 9.0) with a logit link function and binomial errors. The
signifi cance of the terms were based on the difference in deviance
(Δ D) of models attributable to the adding or removing of
the predictor in question using a likelihood ratio test (the χ2 test
with one degree of freedom was applied). Tadpole mass at metamorphosis
from treatments containing no fi sh (no individuals
survived in cages with carp) was analysed using ANOVA. Proportions
of metamorphs and Anisoptera numbers were used as
covariates to examine the role of thinning and Anisoptera density
effects. A two-way ANOVA was used to evaluate the effect
of carp presence in the cages and the indirect (‘low- vs highcarp’)
effect of fi sh in the pond, where the cage was installed
on Zygoptera and Anisoptera densities and the total macrophyte
biomass in cages.
Prior to analyses, data were usually log transformed to normalise
the distribution and reduce heteroscedasticity.

xresults
Pond surveys
The size/total biomass of carp cohort was the only
statistically signifi cant factor in all models. On average,
estimates of total macroinvertebrate diversity
(spring: REML Wald χ2
1 = 9.1, p = 0.003; summer: χ2
1
= 22.1, p < 0.001) and amphibian diversity (χ2
1 = 29.7,
p < 0.001) were signifi cantly greater in low-carp ponds
than in high-carp ponds (Table 2). Both coverage by
submerged macrophytes and Secchi transparency were
signifi cantly higher in low-carp ponds than in highcarp
ponds (Table 2). Water transparency estimates
were conservative because Secchi disc was frequently
visible on the substratum of 0+ ponds. Correspondingly,
nephelometric turbidity and chlorophyll-a concentrations
were lower in ponds stocked with 0+ than
in high-carp ponds (Table 2). Blue-green algae blooms
were observed occasionally in high-carp ponds at the
end of July and in August.
Enclosure/exclosure experiment
Juvenile recruitment of both anuran species was totally
suppressed in the presence of carp in the enclosures
(Fig. 1). GLM models obtained for P. fuscus and H. arborea
accounted for 91.8 % and 78.7 % of the original
deviance in tadpole survival, of which carp presence
in the cage explained 82.1 % and 78.4 %, respectively.
Maximal juvenile recruitment rates in no-carp treatments
were 94 % in P. fuscus and 100 % in H. arborea.
Considerably more metamorphosed P. fuscus juveniles
were caught from no-carp cages installed in the highcarp
pond than in the low-carp pond, but no signifi cant
effect was found for H. arborea (Table 3). In neither
species did mass at metamorphosis depend on the size/
total biomass of fi sh in the pond where the cages were
installed (both F1,10 < 1.04; p > 0.333). Also, it was not
related to Anisoptera density and the fi nal number of
survivors in the cage (all p ≥ 0.2).
Direct fi sh presence strongly affected Anisoptera
numbers in cages: only a single Anisoptera naiad
was found in one cage containing carp (ANOVA
with unbalanced design; F1,55 = 39.76, p < 0.001) and
no Zygoptera were retrieved from cages stocked with
carp (F1,55 = 22.80, p < 0.001). Neither Zygoptera nor
Anisoptera numbers differed between cages installed
in the low-carp pond and the high-carp pond (F1,55
= 0.91, p = 0.344 and F1,55 = 2.40, p = 0.157, respectively;
Fig. 2).
At the end of the experiment submerged macrophyte
biomass was much higher in cages installed in
the low-carp than in the high-carp pond (ANOVA F1,28
= 8.62, p < 0.02; Fig. 3). The effect of carp presence/
absence and the interaction carp presence/absence *
habitat factor were not signifi cant (F1,28 = 0.51 and
F1,28 = 0.55, respectively; both p > 0.5). In the lowcarp
pond cages were dominated by Batrachium aquatile,
Ceratophyllum demersum, Elodea canadensis
and Potamogeton lucens (usually a single species per
cage). In cages installed in the high-carp pond only B.
aquatile occurred.


xdiscussion
The pond surveys showed that low-carp ponds supported
contrastingly higher levels of macroinvertebrate
and amphibian diversity than high-carp ponds. Water
quality characteristics in ponds differing in carp density
and individual size were typical for different phases
of the clear-turbid state. Phytoplankton abundance and
turbidity were higher, whereas water transparency and
submerged vegetation cover were lower in high-carp
than in low-carp ponds. The present results confi rm
the adverse effects of carp on aquatic biodiversity (reviewed
in Weber & Brown 2009). These effects can be
dependent both on the standing biomass (Lougheed et
al. 1998, Williams et al. 2002, Haas et al. 2007, Bajer
et al. 2009) and on traits associated with fi sh individual
size (see also Richardson & Whoriskey 1992, Driver
et al. 2005).
The outcomes of the enclosure/exclosure trials provide
the experimental evidence that the low diversity
of amphibians and macroinvertebrates in high-carp
ponds is related rather to fi sh predation than habitat
modifi cation. In contrast to no-carp treatments, both
anuran and odonate larvae failed to persist in the cages
with carp. Negative effects of habitat conditions were
not detectable. Later predation trials recorded using
a digital camcorder revealed that carp was a gapesize
limited forager. Notwithstanding, carp preyed
on even relatively large-sized tadpoles by attempting
to suction them in; captured tadpoles were occasionally
expectorated, presumably due to their resistance
(J. Kloskowski 2011 in press). This indicates that fi sh
individual size may be no less important for carp impact
than density. Resource competition with fi sh is
unlikely to be of importance considering similar conditions
within and outside cages. Even if carp could
diminish amphibian food resources, tadpoles living at
unnaturally high densities or kept on starvation diets
may survive for many weeks (Calef 1973).
Cage experiments may have resulted in greater mortality
rates of amphibian and odonate larvae than naturally
occurring in ponds because of the smaller spatial
scale and simplifi ed conditions (Petersen et al. 1999).
However, the outcomes were in line with the differences
in macroinvertebrate and amphibian diversity
between low-carp and high-carp ponds. Until summer
young-of-the-year fi sh apparently remained too small
to deplete larger-sized, mobile prey. With growth, the
carp’s predatory capability may considerably increase.
Although fi sh individuals used in the experiment were
relatively small (TL 13–14 cm), they were able to
eliminate all caged tadpoles. The present fi ndings suggest
that the stereotypic view of carp as a ‘non-predatory’
species unable to exploit free-swimming, evasive
prey should be reconsidered. The carp’s feeding mode,
the ‘particulate intake’, a fast food suction, forceful
enough to ingest prey within a head length of fi sh (Sibbing
1988), may allow for feeding on organisms which
are relatively mobile or which use structural refugia.
Also, carp may exert a strong consumptive pressure on
such prey by depleting the early developmental stages,
i.e. eggs and larvae (Vilizzi 1998). Fish predation may
be accompanied by non-consumptive effects on prey,
e.g. avoidance of fi sh dominated waters by ovipositing
insects and amphibians (e.g. Resetarits 2001, Binckley
& Resetarits 2002).
By contrast, direct consumption by carp was apparently
of minor importance for the abundance of
submerged vegetation in the ponds (contra to King &
Hunt 1967, Sidorkewicj et al. 1998; see also Williams
et al. 2002). Vegetation density was higher in cages
placed in clear-water ponds irrespective of carp presence,
while cages placed in turbid water had uniformly
low vegetation density even if they contained no carp.
However, direct effects on plants may depend on susceptibility
of the local species (Zambrano & Hinojosa
1999). Seed abundance was not controlled in the cages,
so it is possible that seed resources were depleted
in high-carp ponds. Also, uprooting of plants by carp
probing the bottom could hamper their growth (see
also Crivelli 1983, Roberts et al. 1995). On the other
hand, direct effects of carp on macrophytes prior to
cage placement (early May) were limited, since carp
remain relatively inactive in early spring due to low
water temperature (Michaels 1988). The present fi ndings
argue in favour of indirect mechanisms, such as
release of nutrients and sediment stirring by benthivorous
fi sh, reported to enhance processes detrimental
to submerged plants, e.g. reduction of available light
and carbon dioxide (Williams et al. 2002, Roozen et
al. 2007, Matsuzaki et al. 2007).
Biotic and abiotic processes mediated by carp are
diffi cult to separate, because they strongly interact
(Scheffer 1998), for instance depredation of phytoplankton
grazers by fi sh reinforces turbid conditions
(Andersson et al. 1978, Jeppesen et al. 1999). Suppression
of amphibian larvae that subsist as phytoplankton
grazers (Seale 1980, Pryor 2003) and frequently reach
high population densities provides a similar trophic
cascade mechanism. On the other hand, indirectly mediated
decrease in macrophyte cover may adversely
affect phytoplankton grazers using submerged vegetation
as a substratum for attachment or a refuge from
fi sh (Schriver et al. 1995) and result in a loop feed
back sustaining the phytoplankton-dominated state
(reviewed in Scheffer 1998). The strength of top-down
effects (through predation) does not diminish the role
of a bottom-up driven shift to a macrophyte-poor turbid
state in structuring aquatic communities. In the
present study effects of habitat conditions were not investigated
at turbidity levels correlated with substantial
biodiversity loss in earlier studies (>> 20 NTU,
Roberts et al. 1995, Lougheed et al. 1998, Stewart &
Downing 2008). Although turbidity was elevated in
high-carp ponds, these levels may be classifi ed as intermediate
compared to the above values. Therefore,
a profound negative infl uence of turbid conditions on
animal diversity cannot be refuted. However, at intermediate
turbidity levels a reverse trend in amphibian
survival was observed: in no-carp treatments signifi -
cantly more P. fuscus juveniles metamorphosed in the
high-carp pond than in the low-carp pond. A possible
explanation might be that tadpoles survive better at
intermediate eutrophication levels, e.g. that intermediate
turbidity levels corresponded to moderate resedimentation,
the latter facilitating tadpole access to
re-suspended food particles (Seale 1980, Flecker et
al. 1999; but see Wood & Richardson 2009). This effect
was not signifi cant in H. arborea, but intraspecifi c
resource competition (and hence dependence on food
availability) in caged P. fuscus tadpoles could be more
intense, because at metamorphosis they achieve much
greater sizes than H. arborea (Berger 2000).
In conclusion, the present fi ndings support the idea
that carp play a dual interactive role in pond communities:
as a habitat modifi er and a macrophagous
predator; however, top-down processes driven by fi sh
predation appear decisive for animal diversity loss in
carp dominated waters. An appreciation of the carp’s
capability to prey upon a broad array of non-benthic
macrozoa, including evasive organisms like amphibian
larvae, is relevant to conservation. In many aquatic
systems with benthivorous fi sh the seasonal plankton
dynamics (e.g. ‘the spring clear-water phase’) or low
nutrient loading delay or preclude the shift to a turbid
state (Sommer et al. 1986, Scheffer 1998, Zambrano
et al. 2001). The present results show that carp is able
to induce dramatic biodiversity decline independent
of the advancement of the eutrophication processes or
prior to ecosystem shift to a turbid state. Low macroinvertebrate
or amphibian densities reported to be
correlated with elevated turbidity may result from the
direct trophic infl uence of benthivorous fi sh that have
simultaneously driven the turbid conditions (Stewart
& Downing 2008). Both impact pathways need to be
recognized, because these are presumably combined
effects of predation and habitat alteration (Parkos et
al. 2003) that make carp such an exceptional threat to
invaded ecosystems.