xabstract
SUMMARY
1. The effects of omnivorous exotic species on native communities are often difficult to predict
because of the broad diets and behavioural flexibility of the omnivore, and the diverse abiotic and
biotic characteristics of invaded systems. We investigated experimentally the effects of a gradient
of density of the introduced, omnivorous red swamp crayfish Procambarus clarkii (Decapoda:
Cambaridae) on two stream communities in southern California, U.S.A.
2. The Ventura River is a clear, flowing stream with a cobble substratum, with abundant algae but
low densities of large invertebrates, small herbivores and snails. The Santa Ynez River at the time
of the study consisted of a series of drying pools underlain by sand, with abundant charophytes,
large predatory invertebrates and herbivores, including snails.
3. In the Ventura River, periphyton biomass and inorganic sediment decreased with increasing
crayfish abundance, but in the Santa Ynez River, periphyton and sediment were unrelated to
crayfish densities.
4. In the Ventura River, the biomass and density of all benthic invertebrates combined,
chironomids, micropredators, the meiofauna (chydorid cladocerans, copepods and ostracods), and
specific predatory and herbivorous taxa, as well as taxon richness, were negatively related to
crayfish density. In the Santa Ynez River, the biomass and average body size of benthic
invertebrates, predatory invertebrates, herbivores and chironomids, but not total invertebrate
density or taxon richness, were negatively related to crayfish density.
5. Fewer large predatory invertebrates and snails (Physella gyrina) in both streams, and baetid
mayflies in the Ventura River, were visible at night in channels where crayfish were abundant.
Snails responded to crayfish by moving above the water line in the Santa Ynez River, but not in the
Ventura River.
6. We suggest that the same omnivore had different effects on these neighbouring streams because
of crayfish predation on large invertebrates in the Santa Ynez River and the scarcity of such prey in
the Ventura River, leading to increased crayfish grazing on periphyton, and reductions in
periphyton-associated invertebrates, in the Ventura River.

xintroduction
Exotic species have had significant effects on native
species and ecosystems through predation, competition
and the alteration of habitat conditions; however, prediction
of the impacts of exotic species is difficult because of
wide variation in the characteristics of invaders and
invaded ecosystems (Levine et al., 2003; Lake & Leishman,
2004; Moyle & Marchetti, 2006; Gerhardt & Collinge,
2007). Predictions are particularly difficult when the
invader is an omnivore, which is able to survive in a
variety of environments and respond behaviourally and
demographically to changes in the environment and
resources (Stenroth & Nystro¨m, 2003; Dorn & Wojdak,
2004; Vandermeer, 2006; Thompson et al., 2007).
Large omnivorous decapods, such as crayfish, occur in
streams, rivers, lakes and ponds in many parts of the
world and feed on detritus, algae, plants, invertebrates
(including other decapods) and vertebrates, often dominating
invertebrate production and acting as keystone
species in food webs (Parkyn, Collier & Hicks, 2001; Usio
& Townsend, 2002; Stenroth & Nystro¨m, 2003; Nystro¨m,
2005; Usio et al., 2009). In Europe and North America,
non-indigenous crayfishes have eliminated or reduced
native crayfish, amphibians, invertebrates and aquatic
vegetation in lakes and streams, sometimes displacing fish
and invertebrates that use these resources (Feminella &
Resh, 1989; Gamradt, Kats & Anzalone, 1997; Covich,
Palmer & Crowl, 1999; Stelzer & Lamberti, 1999; Lodge,
2000). The net outcome of direct and indirect effects of
crayfish on other species depends on the strength of
species interactions. For example, crayfish often reduce
the abundance of grazing snails, releasing algae from snail
grazing; however, crayfish also directly consume algae, so
the net effects of crayfish on algae will depend on the
relative magnitude of direct and indirect effects (Lodge
et al., 1994). Similar considerations apply when examining
the role of crayfish as ecosystem engineers, where crayfish
indirectly affect invertebrates or algae by altering sedimentation
and substratum characteristics (Statzner, Peltret
& Tomanova, 2003; Usio et al., 2009). Further, changes
in the behaviour and distribution of aquatic consumers
induced by crayfish may affect the predators, competitors
or resources of these consumers (Lima & Dill, 1990; Klose,
2011).
The red swamp crayfish (Procambarus clarkii Girard)
was introduced into southern California sometime
between 1924 and 1954 and is considered a large, prolific,
aggressive and adaptable species (Holmes, 1924; Huner &
Barr, 1994). Owing to its broad environmental tolerances,
P. clarkii has successfully invaded a wide range of habitats
in California, including commercial rice fields, irrigation
canals, freshwater marshes, streams, rivers, lakes and
ponds (Sommer & Goldman, 1983; Feminella & Resh,
1989; Gamradt et al., 1997). Although recent studies have
shown that crayfish play an important role in benthic food
webs (Covich et al., 1999; Usio & Townsend, 2002;
Nystro¨m, 2005), no attempts have been made to evaluate
crayfish effects on different stream communities within
the same geographical area. Many earlier studies of the
effects of crayfish on lower trophic levels were conducted
in the laboratory or small cages in a single system, and
the indirect and direct effects of the same omnivorous
predator on the complex food webs of disparate systems
are less well known. Because streams vary greatly
in their environmental and biological characteristics, it
is possible to compare the effects of P. clarkii on
stream communities that differ in a variety of such
characteristics.
We used the same methods to compare the effects of the
same crayfish species on two California streams, the Santa
Ynez and the Ventura Rivers, which differed in their
physical and biological characteristics. At the time of our
study, the Santa Ynez River consisted of stagnant pools
with high densities of large invertebrates, such as predators
and snails, whereas the Ventura River consisted
primarily of flowing riffles and runs with abundant algae,
but few large invertebrates. We address the following
questions: (i) Does P. clarkii have different impacts on the
abundance of algae, invertebrates and sediment in the two
streams? (ii) What are the relative strengths of direct and
indirect effects of the red swamp crayfish on the different
stream food webs and what drives the effect of crayfish on
different systems? Based on the relative availabilities of
different food types (e.g. invertebrates versus algae), we
hypothesised that crayfish would reduce the large, dominant
herbivores (particularly snails) in the Santa Ynez
River, resulting in an increase in periphyton, but that
crayfish would mainly consume periphyton in the Ventura
River, leading to decreases in algae, sediment and
other invertebrate grazers (Weber & Lodge, 1990; Hart,
1992; Lodge et al., 1994; Creed & Reed, 2004). Because
crayfish are omnivorous, behaviourally flexible and may
be sensitive to many abiotic and biotic factors which differ
in these two streams, we tested our hypotheses by
manipulating the density of P. clarkii experimentally.

xmethods
Study sites and invasion history
Studies were conducted in the Santa Ynez and Ventura
Rivers, in southern California, U.S.A. Historical sources of
the populations of P. clarkii used here are unknown,
although it was introduced from its native habitats in
north-eastern Mexico and the southern U.S.A. into southern
California streams as early as the 1920s (Holmes,
1924). It is likely that crayfish were introduced into both
systems at about the same time, given their proximity and
early use by anglers. Neither stream has any native
decapods.
Field work was conducted in a fifth-order section
(width 5–6.5 m) of the Santa Ynez River in Santa Barbara
County, California, U.S.A. (3432.37¢N, 11951.50¢W; altitude,
231 m), in June 2002. The section, 2 km upstream of
Cachuma Reservoir, flows westward through a narrow
channel between mountains. The stream is slightly alkaline
and oligotrophic (Table 1) and has an open riparian
canopy and streamside vegetation dominated by willow
(Salix spp. L), western sycamore (Plantanus racemosa Nutt)
and coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia Ne´e). At the time of
the study, average water depth was 0.4 m in riffles and
0.7 m in pools, current velocity ranged from 0 to
12 cm s)1, and water temperatures ranged from 17 to
22 C; however, this section of the river was drying up
and consisted primarily of a series of discrete, stagnant
pools. The macroalga Chara (L.), and microalgae (primarily
diatoms) covered the bed, which consisted of silt, sand
and gravel with a few small cobbles, and the benthos was
composed primarily of snails (Physella gyrina Say), worms
(oligochaetes and nematodes), crustaceans [Hyalella azteca
(Saussure), ostracods] and predatory invertebrates [hemipterans,
including the Family Corixidae: Graptocorixa
(Hungerford) and Family Naucoridae: Ambrysus (Sta°l),
and damselflies, Family Coenagrionidae: Enallagma (Charpentier)],
with oligochaetes and H. azteca dominating
invertebrate biomass. At this site, mean crayfish density
was 2 m)2 and seven fish species were observed or
collected (Table 1).
On the Ventura River, the study site was located in a
third-order section (width 6–8 m) in Ventura County,
California, U.S.A. (3434.438¢N, 11929.913¢W; altitude,
61 m). The Ventura River is alkaline and mesotrophic,
with a mostly open canopy, and riparian vegetation
dominated by giant reed (Arundo donax L.), western
sycamore and willow (Table 1). Current velocity and
water temperature at the time of the study in July 2003
ranged from 4 to 25 cm s)1 and 18–22.5 C, respectively,
and mean depth was 0.3 m in riffles and ranged from 1 to
4 m in pools. The substratum consisted largely of sand
and gravel in pools, medium to large cobbles in riffles,
and the dominant macroalga was Cladophora sp. (Ku¨ tzing),
and dominant microalgae were diatoms. The
benthos was dominated by mayflies (Tricorythodes Ulmer),
dipterans (Chironomidae: Chironominae, Orthocladiinae),
worms (oligochaetes), crustaceans (H. azteca) and microcrustaceans
(ostracods, chydorid cladocerans and copepods).
Mean crayfish density was 4 m)2, and four fish
species were observed or collected (Table 1). We observed
crayfish throughout the study reach and in all areas of
experimental channels where they were introduced.
Experimental design
We conducted field experiments using the same channel
set-up in both streams. Twelve parallel stream channels
constructed from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe cut in half
longitudinally were placed in an unshaded stream reach
with the top edges raised 2–3 cm above the surface of the
water. Two (2 m L · 0.31 m W · 0.15 m H) stream channels
were mounted onto each of six 1.2 m · 2.4 m
plywood sheets coated with Varathane, a non-toxic water
sealant. The ends of each channel were fitted with coarsemesh
plastic screens (0.7 cm width), which were cleaned
daily, allowing continuous water flow and colonisation by
invertebrates while preventing the escape or entry of
crayfish. Natural substrata from the streambed were
elutriated 10 times to remove invertebrates and detritus,
mixed well and added to each stream channel to a depth
of 2.5 cm. The substratum in the Santa Ynez River was
mainly silt and sand with a few cobbles ranging from 2 to
10 cm in circumference, whereas in the Ventura River, the
substratum in channels contained little silt and sand and
was composed of equal numbers of small, medium and
large cobbles (mean circumferences 21, 36 and 58 cm,
respectively). We then collected invertebrates and detritus
from an area of streambed equal to the area of all of the
experimental channels combined, then thoroughly mixed
this water sample (20 L) in a large container and distributed
equal aliquots to each stream channel, ensuring that
the initial abundance of invertebrates and detritus was
similar among channels. In addition, colonisation by
invertebrates and algae into channels was allowed for
1 week prior to the start of the experiment.
Square unglazed ceramic tiles (2.3 cm on each
side · 0.5 cm thick) were leached in distilled water for
2 weeks, then transferred to the stream bed for 4 weeks
for periphyton colonisation and growth. Fifty of these
conditioned tiles were placed on the bottom of each
stream channel at equally spaced intervals at the beginning
of the experiment. Because tiles may turn over or
become covered in sediment, more tiles were placed on
the bottom of channels than were collected.
At each site, channels were stocked with crayfish at one
of six densities (0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 crayfish per channel, two
replicates per treatment). This density gradient covered
the range of local P. clarkii densities found within each
study reach. All individual crayfish were of similar length
and mass [8.9 ± 0.1 and 9.3 ± 0.2 cm TL and 23.0 ± 0.8
and 26.2 ± 1.1 g wet mass (mean ± 1 SE)] in the Santa
Ynez and Ventura Rivers, respectively, and survived for
the duration of the experiment; however, two individuals
missing a claw were immediately replaced. Four openended
PVC cylinders, each 20 cm long · 8 cm in diameter,
were placed on the bottom of each stream channel at
equally spaced intervals to provide shelter for crayfish.
Channel tops were covered with thin, transparent netting
(0.4 cm mesh) and secured with removable metal clips to
exclude avian and mammalian predators and to prevent
crayfish and snails from escaping. Light (PAR) was
measured below the surface of the water within each
stream channel using a Li-Cor 250 light meter, both with
and without the netting in place, to estimate the amount
of light reduction. The netting reduced irradiance by 4.5%
within each stream channel.
Experimental sampling
Both experiments ran for 14 days. Ten days after the start
of the experiments, night visual surveys were performed
within each stream channel to determine the number of
benthic invertebrates visible [i.e. epibenthic invertebrates
on the substratum surface and on the walls of stream
channels and exposed surfaces of crayfish shelters, which
could be seen and counted with the naked eye, including
the number of snails (P. gyrina) floating at the water
surface, and below and above the water line of each
channel]. One hour after sunset, two individuals independently
counted all invertebrates visible within the
entire stream channel using a flashlight or headlamp and
these individual counts were averaged for each channel.
Channel substrata and ceramic tiles were sampled prior
to the addition of crayfish to determine initial invertebrate
densities and periphyton biomass [estimated from ashfree
dry mass (AFDM) and chlorophyll a concentrations],
using a 0.041-m2 Surber sampler (mesh size, 250 lm) for
invertebrates (one sample per channel) and ceramic tiles
for periphyton (4 removed per channel). At the end of the
experiment, four Surber samples were taken from each
channel, pooled into one composite sample and then
preserved in the field in 75% ethanol, with rose bengal
added to aid in the separation of invertebrates from
particulate matter. Four ceramic tiles were collected from
each channel for periphyton determinations at the end of
the experiment, placed in black plastic canisters and put
on ice and then frozen on return to the laboratory.
Laboratory methods
Invertebrates were identified to the lowest practical
taxonomic level (generally family or genus for insects
and molluscs) and counted using a dissecting microscope
at 12· magnification. Average individual dry mass for
each taxon within each channel was determined by
averaging the lengths of 10 individuals collected from
each channel and measured to the nearest 0.01 mm using
digital callipers, then calculating dry mass using published
length–mass relationships (Meyer, 1989). Invertebrate
taxa were assigned to functional feeding group or
size (i.e. meiofauna) categories, including small herbivores
⁄ detritivores, predatory invertebrates, micropredators,
meiofauna and filter-feeders, using designations in
Merritt & Cummins (1996) and Thorpe & Covich (2001)
(Supporting Information, Appendix S1 & S2). Owing to
their broad range of feeding modes and diets, Chironominae
(here Chironominae and Orthocladiinae combined)
were excluded from functional feeding group categorisations;
however, the Tanypodinae were treated separately
as micropredators. All chironomids (Chironominae,
Orthocladiinae and Tanypodinae) were included in total
invertebrate density and biomass calculations, and Chironominae
⁄ Orthocladiinae and Tanypodinae densities
and biomasses were examined as separate response
variables.
Periphyton samples were obtained by scrubbing ceramic
tiles with a plastic brush, rinsing with distilled water
into a graduated cylinder, diluting the resulting slurry to a
known volume and then mixing thoroughly and splitting
into two equal aliquots for AFDM and chlorophyll a
determinations. Each aliquot was filtered onto an A⁄E
glass fibre filter and then stored at )20 C in the dark until
later analysis (filters for AFDM were pre-combusted for
30 min at 450 C and then pre-weighed). For chlorophyll a
analysis, filters were extracted in the dark at 4 C in 90%
acetone for 24 h and chlorophyll a concentrations corrected
for phaeophytin were measured by fluorometry
(Turner Designs 10-AU) (Sartory & Grobbelaar, 1986). For
AFDM analysis, filters were dried at 60 C for 24 h and
weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg, and then filters were
reweighed following combustion in a muffle furnace
(Thermolyne 48000) at 500 C for 2 h and drying at 60 C
for 24 h. AFDM was determined as the difference between
initial and final dry mass following ignition, and inorganic
sediment concentrations were measured as the final
dry mass (Steinman & Lamberti, 1996).
Data analysis
We used linear and polynomial least squares regression
analyses to assess the effects of a gradient of crayfish
density on periphyton biomass, inorganic sediment and
the density, biomass, Simpson’s diversity, evenness
(Pielou, 1966), taxon richness and body size of total
benthic invertebrates, individual invertebrate taxa and
invertebrate functional feeding groups. Rarefaction techniques
were applied to taxon richness data because the
number of taxa collected will depend on sample size;
consequently, we examined the number of species
collected at a standardised number of individuals (300)
using resampling methods (Gotelli & Entsminger, 2009).
Prior to all analyses, normality was tested using the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (Zar, 1996) and residuals were
plotted and examined. If assumptions of normality and
homogeneity of variances could not be met, then the
dependent variable was log-transformed. When discrete
or continuous data included zero values, one or the
smallest detectable unit for that response variable was
added to all values for that variable prior to transformation
(Quinn & Keough, 2002). All statistical analyses were
performed using JMP Version 6.0.0 for WindowsTM (SAS
Institute, Inc. Cary, NC, U.S.A.).


xresults
Periphyton (diatoms) and inorganic sediment
Mean abundance of periphyton (mg m)2) and inorganic
sediment (mg m)2) was greater in the Ventura River than
in the Santa Ynez River across all stream channels (chl a ttest:
t = 20.4, P < 0.0001; AFDM t-test: t = )9.38,
P < 0.0001, and inorganic sediment t-test: t = )5.58,
P = 0.0002, respectively, d.f. = 22 in all cases) (Fig. 1).
There were no significant relationships between periphyton
biomass or inorganic sediment and crayfish density
in the Santa Ynez River, although periphyton and inorganic
sediment declined with increasing crayfish abundance
in the Ventura River (Fig. 1).
Night visual surveys
The numbers of snails and predatory invertebrates (i.e.
Hemiptera, Corixidae: Graptocorixa and Odonata, Coenagrionidae:
Enallagma) in the Santa Ynez River, and snails,
predatory invertebrates (i.e. Graptocorixa) and baetid
mayflies in the Ventura River, exposed on the substratum
in channels at night, declined significantly with increasing
crayfish density (Fig. 2). The proportion of P. gyrina
populations occurring above the water line increased
with increasing crayfish abundance in the Santa Ynez
River, but not in the Ventura River (Fig. 2). Snail density
was very low in the Ventura River, however, and was two
orders of magnitude less than that in the Santa Ynez River
(snail density t-test: t = )3.66, d.f. = 22, P = 0.004) (Fig. 2).
Invertebrate responses
Invertebrate biomass and density across treatments in the
Santa Ynez River were dominated by Oligochaeta (40% of
biomass, 30% of total density), H. azteca (34, 18%),
Ostracoda (9, 29%), P. gyrina (6, 1%) and Nematoda (3,
18%). Small herbivores comprised 85.5%, predatory
invertebrates 4.2%, micropredators 0.3%, meiofauna
9.4% and Chironominae ⁄ Orthocladiinae 0.6% of total
invertebrate biomass and 68.4, 0.2, 0.6, 30.5 and 0.3%,
respectively, of total invertebrate density in the Santa
Ynez River (Appendix S1 & S2). In the Ventura River,
invertebrate biomass and density were dominated by
H. azteca (33% of total biomass, 8% of total density),
Chironominae ⁄ Orthocladiinae (32, 14%), Oligochaeta (9,
5%), Chydoridae (7, 22%), Tricorythodes (5, 2%) and
Ostracoda (5, 38%). Small herbivores comprised 50%,
predatory invertebrates 2%, micropredators 2%, meiofauna
13%, filter-feeders 0.3% and Chironominae ⁄Orthocladiinae
32% of total invertebrate biomass and 19, 1, 0.8,
66, 0.02 and 14%, respectively, of total invertebrate
density in the Ventura River (Appendix S1 & S2).
Rarefied taxon richness was marginally higher in the
Ventura River (26 taxa) than in the Santa Ynez River (18),
and the total number of taxa collected and rarefied taxon
richness declined, and evenness increased, with crayfish
density in the Ventura River, but not in the Santa Ynez
River (Fig. 3). Crayfish reduced 38% (10 of 26) of the taxa
in the Ventura River (i.e. Helisoma, Graptocorixa,
Chironominae ⁄ Orthocladiinae, Tanypodinae, Tricorythodes,
Hydroptila, Nematoda, Caloparyphus, Ostracoda and
Cyclopoida), most of which were associated with high
abundance of periphyton or sediment (except for Helisoma
and Graptocorixa, these taxa were related to AFDM
[Pearson’s r = +0.37 to +0.44, P < 0.04) and inorganic
sediment (Pearson’s r = +0.35 to +0.49, P < 0.05)].
Mean total invertebrate biomass and density across
treatments were not different between the Santa Ynez and
Ventura Rivers (3160 ± 521 and 2758 ± 363 mg m)2 and
29618 ± 3133 and 38564 ± 5515 m)2 mean ± 1 SE; t-test:
t = 0.75, d.f. = 22, P = 0.47, t-test: t = )1.33, d.f. = 11,
P = 0.21, respectively), but total benthic invertebrate
biomass at both sites, and total invertebrate density in
the Ventura River, declined with increasing crayfish
density (Figs 4 & 5). The biomass of herbivores ⁄ detritivores,
particularly snails and amphipods, and the density
of elmid beetle (Optioservus) larvae declined with increasing
crayfish density in the Santa Ynez River, but not in the
Ventura River. Chironominae ⁄Orthocladiinae density in
the Ventura River, and biomass at both sites, declined
with increasing crayfish abundance, as did the densities of
Tricorythodes, Hydroptila and Helisoma in the Ventura
River. Meiofaunal (primarily ostracods, copepods and
chydorid cladocerans) biomass and density decreased
significantly with increasing crayfish density in the Ventura
River, but not in the Santa Ynez River (Figs 4 & 5).
Although the biomasses of total invertebrates, herbivores
and Chironominae ⁄ Orthocladiinae declined with
increasing crayfish density in the Santa Ynez River, the
densities of these groups were not significantly related to
crayfish density. This difference could be attributed to the
effect of crayfish on the size structure and mean individual
biomass of invertebrates, because the average body
size of all invertebrate taxa, including herbivorous,
micropredatory (Probezzia sp., Tanypodinae) and predatory
invertebrates (Graptocorixa, Enallagma), decreased
with increasing crayfish density in the Santa Ynez River
(Fig. 6). In contrast, total invertebrate density declined
with increasing crayfish density in the Ventura River, and
the effect of crayfish on total invertebrate biomass was
enhanced by reductions in the body size of Chironominae
⁄ Orthocladiinae (the second most abundant invertebrate
group in the Ventura River) induced by crayfish
(Fig. 6). Chironomids were smaller in the Ventura River
than in the Santa Ynez River (mean length = 7.8 ± 1.3 mm
in the Santa Ynez River and 6.0 ± 0.1 mm in the Ventura
River; chironomid length t-test: t = )3.12, d.f. = 12,
P = 0.005).
The biomass, density and mean body size of predatory
invertebrates (i.e. Enallagma, Graptocorixa, Probezzia sp.), as
well as naucorid beetle (Ambrysus) density, declined with
increasing crayfish density in the Santa Ynez River. In the
Ventura River, biomass and densities of two specific
predatory taxa, Graptocorixa and tanypod midges, decreased
with increasing P. clarkii density (Fig. 6; Appendix
S1 & S2). The biomass of caddisflies, snails,
amphipods and flatworms in the Ventura River, nematodes
in the Santa Ynez River and mayflies, naucorids,
sphaerid clams, oligochaetes and mites in both systems
showed no relationships with crayfish density.

xdiscussion
The broad geographical distribution and high abundance
of P. clarkii worldwide, and its complex effects on benthic
invertebrates, periphyton, macrophytes, detritus and inorganic
sediment, underscore the potential importance of
this invasive species in altering the structure and function
of freshwater communities (Rudnick & Resh, 2005; Gherardi
& Acquistapace, 2007). We showed that this large
omnivore had different effects on periphyton biomass,
amounts of inorganic sediment, invertebrate taxonomic
richness and evenness, and benthic invertebrate biomass,
density and community structure in nearby streams
dominated by pools (Santa Ynez River) or riffles (Ventura
River). Our results suggest that crayfish effects on stream
communities will be influenced by environmental and
biological factors, such as flow regime, habitat complexity,
the taxonomic composition of the recipient invertebrate
assemblage and the abundance of individual taxa. Crayfish
densities were two times lower, Physella abundance an
order of magnitude higher, and AFDM and chlorophyll a
between one and two orders of magnitude lower in the
Santa Ynez River than in the Ventura River, suggesting
that crayfish impacts on these communities depended on
the availability of different food types.
Based on the literature, the known food habits of
crayfish and the availability of different food types, we
predicted that crayfish would reduce snails in the Santa
Ynez River, causing an increase in periphyton biomass,
whereas crayfish would primarily reduce periphyton in
the Ventura River, causing associated declines in sediment
and periphyton-associated invertebrates. The degree
to which these expectations were met was variable. In the
Santa Ynez River, the biomass of predatory invertebrates,
chironomids and herbivores (particularly snails) was
negatively related to crayfish density, whereas, contrary
to our prediction, that of periphyton and meiofauna was
unaffected by crayfish. Crayfish effects on benthic microalgal
biomass reported in the literature have ranged from
positive to negative to negligible (Creed, 1994; Nystro¨m,
Bro¨nmark & Grane´li, 1999; Stelzer & Lamberti, 1999).
Although predation by crayfish on grazers (i.e. snails)
often results in indirect positive effects on periphyton
biomass (Luttenton, Horgan & Lodge, 1998), crayfish may
also indirectly positively affect microalgal biomass by
removing senescent cells and detritus allowing the viable
algal understorey to increase (Charlebois & Lamberti,
1996). We hypothesise that we did not observe an indirect
positive effect of crayfish on microalgae in the Santa Ynez
River because of the combined effects of indirect and
direct pathways of interaction, with indirect positive
effects on algae being ameliorated by direct crayfish
consumption of algae and predatory invertebrates, the
latter perhaps leading to a trophic cascade (Charlebois &
Lamberti, 1996; Nystro¨m, Bro¨nmark & Grane´li, 1996;
Stelzer & Lamberti, 1999). Our results were consistent
with those of Charlebois & Lamberti (1996), who reported
that crayfish (Orconectes rusticus Girard) reduced the
abundance of most common macroinvertebrate taxa but
had weak effects on periphyton (mostly diatoms). In the
Ventura River, in contrast, there were negative relationships
between periphyton, specific predatory invertebrates
(Graptocorixa, Tanypodinae), chironomids, and
meiofaunal biomass, and crayfish density, but no discernible
effects of crayfish on other herbivores or filter-feeders.
Carbon stable isotope analysis indicated that microalgae
were a dominant food source for snails (Lymnaea stagnalis
Linnaeus) but a minor food source of crayfish in a Swedish
system (Nystro¨m et al., 1999). However, Nystro¨m et al.’s
(1999) algal community was dominated by adnate, tightly
attached green microalgae (e.g. Coleochaete sp. Brebisson),
whereas the periphyton of the Ventura River was comprised
of many less tightly attached diatoms [e.g. there
were substantial numbers of Melosira varians C. Agardh.,
Navicula sp. Bory and Synedra ulna (Nitzsch) Ehrenb.],
suggesting that direct crayfish grazing could have reduced
benthic algal biomass at this site (Schofield et al., 2008).
Further, simultaneous reductions in both sediment and
algae indicated that crayfish may have been sweeping or
scraping the substratum surface to obtain food.
Crayfish reduced total invertebrate density, the number
of taxa collected and rarefied richness in the Ventura
River and total invertebrate biomass in both systems. The
negative effect of P. clarkii on the number of taxa in the
Ventura River appears to be one of the few documented
instances of a negative effect of invasive crayfish on the
diversity of native invertebrates (also see Stenroth &
Nystro¨m, 2003). Procambarus clarkii reduced 10 of 26 taxa
in the Ventura River, most of which were associated with
high levels of periphyton or sediment, suggesting that
declines in the abundance and diversity of these groups
were mediated through reductions in periphyton and
sediment caused by crayfish (Helms & Creed, 2005). In
contrast, crayfish mainly reduced abundant, large, slowmoving
prey, such as snails and odonates, in the Santa
Ynez River and did not eliminate any taxa, resulting in no
relationship between taxon richness and crayfish density
in that system. Crayfish reduced invertebrate biomass,
including the biomass of 44 and 39% of all taxa in the
Santa Ynez and Ventura Rivers, respectively, agreeing
with the results of other studies (Stelzer & Lamberti, 1999;
Nystro¨m et al., 2001; Stenroth & Nystro¨m, 2003; Usio et al.,
2006). Despite general relationships between invertebrate
biomass and crayfish density, there were clear differences
in the responses of specific invertebrate taxa and trophic
groups to P. clarkii between these systems, indicating the
difficulties associated with predicting general community
responses to crayfish introductions.
As postulated, the different effects of crayfish on these
two systems could be attributed to the food preferences of
crayfish and to differences in community composition. In
general, crayfish prefer relatively large, slow-moving taxa,
such as snails and odonates, which were abundant in the
Santa Ynez River but rare in the Ventura River (Usio &
Townsend, 2002; Stenroth & Nystro¨m, 2003; Dorn &
Wojdak, 2004; Nystro¨m, 2005; Usio et al., 2006, 2009).
Crayfish had strong negative effects on the biomass, body
sizes and ⁄ or density of large predatory invertebrates
(odonates, naucorids and corixids), herbivores (snails and
amphipods) and large chironomids (mean length in 0
crayfish treatment = 9–12 mm) in the Santa Ynez River,
agreeing with previous studies (Stelzer & Lamberti, 1999;
Nystro¨m et al., 2001; Helms & Creed, 2005; Dickey &
McCarthy, 2007). Although the mechanisms causing these
reductions are uncertain, it is probable that crayfish
reduced sedentary or slow-moving prey through direct
consumption; however, it is possible that mobile prey (e.g.
amphipods, corixids and naucorids) avoided or fled from
channels with high crayfish activity (Englund, Cooper &
Sarnelle, 2001; Usio et al., 2009). Although particular predatory
and herbivorous taxa (e.g. Graptocorixa, Tricorythodes,
Hydroptila, Chironominae ⁄ Orthocladiinae, Tanypodinae
and small snails) were negatively affected by crayfish in
the Ventura River, these taxa were much less abundant or
smaller than the dominant predators or herbivores in the
Santa Ynez River. For example, the dominant invertebrate
predators in the Ventura River, the Tanypodinae midges,
were rare in the Santa Ynez River and much smaller than
the dominant invertebrate predators in the Santa Ynez
system (hemipterans and odonates). Previous studies have
reported positive, negative or no crayfish effects on the
abundance of many of these taxa, and it appears that
responses to crayfish are somewhat species specific,
depending on the behavioural and size characteristics of
prey (Hart, 1992; Creed & Reed, 2004; Olsson et al., 2008).
In both of our systems, crayfish reduced disproportionately
the densities of the largest individuals of dominant
taxa. In addition, because the densities of many small
mayfly, caddisfly, chironomid and meiofaunal taxa are
positively related to algal abundance, crayfish may have
reduced these taxa indirectly by reducing algal biomass
(Dudley, Cooper & Hemphill, 1986; Hart, 1992; Creed &
Reed, 2004). In summary, we postulate that crayfish had
the greatest effects on large, epibenthic prey, such as
snails, amphipods, predatory invertebrates and large
chironomids in the Santa Ynez River, whereas crayfish
in the Ventura River fed primarily on abundant periphyton
and periphyton-associated taxa because of the
scarcity of large, epibenthic prey in this system, probably
leading to reductions in both (Fig. 7).
Crayfish are active nocturnal predators, and there was a
strong agreement between the results of night-time
surveys and benthic sampling (Cukerzis, 1988). There
was also a strong positive relationship between the
proportion of P. gyrina populations above the water line
at night and crayfish density in the Santa Ynez River, but
not in the Ventura River. These results largely agree with
other studies demonstrating that actively foraging crayfish
reduce the abundance of conspicuous invertebrates
and alter prey behaviour, such as inducing snails to leave
the water (Stelzer & Lamberti, 1999; Turner, Turner &
Lappi, 2006; Dickey & McCarthy, 2007; Klose, 2011).
Although such changes in the distribution of snails in
response to crayfish might influence periphyton abundance,
no net effects of crayfish on periphyton were
observed in the Santa Ynez River.
In conclusion, crayfish primarily reduced large
consumers in the Santa Ynez River and the abundance
of periphyton and sediment in the Ventura River (with
indirect or direct effects on small invertebrates associated
with periphyton), indicating that crayfish were largely
secondary or tertiary consumers in the Santa Ynez River
and primary consumers in the Ventura River. Because
streams in Mediterranean climates have long periods of
low or non-existent flows, and because many climate
change models forecast increased droughts in these
regions (e.g. Null, Viers & Mount, 2010), our results
suggest that the effects of this exotic omnivore may vary
with climate change as indicated by the contrasting effects
of crayfish on drying (Santa Ynez River) versus freeflowing
(Ventura River) systems.