xabstract
This paper reports on the response by amphibians, benthic macroinvertebrates,
and zooplankton in naturally fishless alpine lakes to fish introductions and subsequent
fish disappearance. We assessed resistance (the degree to which a system is altered when
the environment changes) by comparing faunal distribution and abundance in lakes that
have never been stocked with fish vs. the distribution and abundance in lakes that have
been stocked and still contain fish. We assessed resilience (the degree and rate of a system’s
return to its previous configuration once the perturbation is removed) by comparing faunal
distribution and abundance in lakes that were stocked at one time but have since reverted
to a fishless condition (stocked-now-fishless lakes) vs. the distribution and abundance in
lakes that have never been stocked. We quantified recovery rates and trajectories by comparing
faunal assemblages of stocked-now-fishless lakes that had been fishless for 5–10,
11–20, and .20 yr.
Faunal assemblages in the study lakes had low resistance to fish introductions, but in
general showed high resilience. The mountain yellow-legged frog (Rana muscosa), conspicuous
benthic macroinvertebrates, and large crustacean zooplankton (.1 mm) were
dramatically reduced in distribution and abundance by fish introductions but generally
recovered to predisturbance levels after fish disappearance. Inconspicuous benthic invertebrate
taxa, small crustacean zooplankton (,1 mm), and rotiferan zooplankton (,0.2 mm)
were either unaffected by fish or increased in the presence of fish. For both the benthic
macroinvertebrate community and the zooplankton community as a whole, fish disappearance
was followed by a steady change away from the configuration characteristic of fishcontaining
lakes and toward that of lakes that had never been stocked. Both communities
remained markedly different from those in never-stocked lakes 5–10 yr after fish disappearance
and converged on the configuration of never-stocked lakes only 11–20 yr after
fish disappearance.
Recovery was likely facilitated by the winged adult stages of many benthic macroinvertebrates,
resting eggs of zooplankton, and nearby source populations of frogs. However,
many frog populations have disappeared since the time that lakes in this study reverted to
a fishless condition, and the viability of zooplankton egg banks should decline in fishcontaining
lakes over time. As a result, faunal resilience may be lower in lakes that revert
to a fishless condition today than is suggested by the results of our study. These findings
have important implications for the restoration of alpine lake ecosystems.

xintroduction
The question of how natural communities respond
to biotic and abiotic perturbations is central to many
of today’s most pressing ecological problems, including
the maintenance of biodiversity in the face of escalating
habitat alteration and the invasion of ecosystems
by exotic species. Although these problems are
often best studied at large spatial and temporal scales,
these scales are rarely amenable to experimentation,
and as a result many of the advances in our understanding
of how communities respond to perturbations
have come from small-scale, short-term field experiments
(Connell and Sousa 1983). The scaling up of
these results to more relevant spatial and temporal
scales is, at best, problematic (Brown et al. 1986, Yodzis
1988, Pimm 1991). As a consequence, while we
often have a good understanding of how communities
respond to perturbations at small spatial and temporal
scales, this perspective may provide few insights into
the nature of responses to perturbations that increasingly
are occurring at the scale of landscapes and entire
ecosystems (Pimm 1991).
Freshwater communities are subject to a wide range
of both natural and anthropogenic disturbances, and
whole-lake experiments have been a particularly ef
fective means by which to describe in detail the response
to perturbation at the scale of the entire ecosystem
(Carpenter and Kitchell 1993, Frost et al. 1998).
Whole-lake experiments, however, generally have several
shortcomings that limit their generality. First, these
studies are typically short term, often lasting only two
to three years (Mittelbach et al. 1995). Such short temporal
scales may only capture the transient dynamics
that characterize food webs following a perturbation
(Yodzis 1988, Tilman 1989). Second, experimental perturbations
of whole lakes have usually been conducted
in only a single direction (e.g., a species is either added
or removed). As suggested by Mittelbach et al. (1995),
studies that examine the effect of a perturbation followed
by removal of the perturbation would allow us
to examine not only system resistance (the degree to
which a system is altered when the environment changes),
but also resilience (Carpenter and Kitchell 1993,
Persson et al. 1993, Mittelbach et al. 1995, Frost et al.
1998), where resilience is the degree to and the rate at
which a system returns to its previous configuration
once the perturbation is removed (sensu Pimm 1991).
Lastly, whole-lake experiments are generally conducted
only at a single site or pair of sites, making it difficult
to generalize from the observed response to how other
similar sites might respond to the same perturbation.
Overcoming these limitations by conducting longterm
experiments, examining both system resistance
and resilience, and replicating these experiments at numerous
sites will often be logistically impossible. However,
many perturbations, such as invasions of exotic
species (Huckins et al. 2000), have been occurring for
decades over large landscapes. Some of these perturbations
offer rare opportunities to understand system
resistance and resilience over spatial and temporal
scales not possible with traditional experiments. For
example, the mountains of western North America contain
thousands of glacially formed alpine lakes, nearly
all of which were historically fishless (Bahls 1992,
Knapp 1996). During the past century, many of these
lakes have been stocked with nonnative fishes to create
recreational fisheries. In some of these lakes, fish introductions
failed to result in a self-sustaining population
and the fish eventually disappeared (Donald
1987). Comparison of faunal assemblages among many
lakes that either remain in a natural fishless condition,
have been stocked and still contain fish, or were stocked
in the past but have since reverted to a fishless condition,
would provide a valuable perspective on the
long-term community response to fish introductions
and the capacity of these communities to recover after
fish disappearance. While the effect of introduced trout
on alpine lake faunal assemblages has been described
using such a single-survey (snapshot) approach (Anderson
1980, Stoddard 1987, Bradford et al. 1998, Carlisle
and Hawkins 1998, Knapp and Matthews 2000),
these studies have generally relied on relatively coarse
presence/absence data (but see Carlisle and Hawkins
1998). In addition, we are not aware of any studies that
have used the snapshot approach to evaluate faunal
recovery after fish disappearance.
Here we present the results of a study of the response
by alpine lake faunal assemblages to fish introductions,
based on snapshot samples of hundreds of lakes with
or without introduced fishes. In addition to evaluating
the resistance of amphibian, zooplankton, and benthic
macroinvertebrate communities, we also evaluate the
resilience of these communities by quantifying faunal
assemblages in lakes that were stocked in the past but
have since reverted to a fishless condition. A key advantage
of our data set is that we can reliably estimate
the year of fish disappearance. Within the class of lakes
that lost their fish populations, there was a wide range
of durations since fish disappearance, which enabled
us to indirectly examine recovery dynamics. Although
the snapshot approach had several limitations, our
study design allowed us to compare resistance and resilience
of lake fauna at a much larger temporal and
spatial scale than in any previous study. We show that
the taxonomic composition and abundance of faunal
assemblages in lakes with or without introduced fishes
were dramatically different, as expected based on previous
studies. Using data from previously stocked but
now fishless lakes, taxonomic composition and abundance
of amphibian, zooplankton, and benthic macroinvertebrate
communities appeared generally to
have recovered within 10–20 yr after fish disappearance.
Therefore, while these alpine lake faunal assemblages
show low resistance to fish introductions, they
appear to be fairly resilient.

xmethods
Study area description
The study area was located in the Sierra Nevada of
eastern California, and encompassed portions of the
John Muir Wilderness (Inyo and Sierra National Forests)
and Kings Canyon National Park (see Knapp and
Matthews 2000 for a map of the study area). The 1400-
km2 study area contains hundreds of lakes (defined as
water bodies with surface areas $0.5 ha), the majority
of which are located in the subalpine and alpine zones
(.2800 m). Lakes throughout the study area are generally
small (,10 ha), oligotrophic, depauperate, and
cold (maximum temperature ,178C, ice-free for 4 mo/
yr; Melack et al. 1985, Stoddard 1987, Bradford et al.
1998). Lakes are similar in physical and chemical characteristics
due to their common glacial origin and their
location in watersheds dominated by intrusive igneous
bedrock (California Division of Mines and Geology
1958, Melack et al. 1985). The entire study area was
naturally fishless as a result of numerous barriers to
upstream movement by fishes (Knapp 1996). Between
1900 and 1960, ;60% of these fishless lakes were
stocked with trout (golden trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
aguabonita; rainbow trout, O. mykiss; brook trout, Sal
velinus fontinalis; and brown trout, Salmo trutta) to
create recreational fisheries (Knapp and Matthews
2000; National Park Service and California Department
of Fish and Game, unpublished stocking records).
Study design
As part of a larger study of the effects of introduced
trout on alpine lake ecosystems, field surveys were conducted
during 1995–1997 to describe the physical characteristics
and fish and amphibian populations in all
lakes and ponds in the study area (n 5 2258; Matthews
and Knapp 1999). In addition, zooplankton and benthic
macroinvertebrate samples were collected from a subset
of water bodies. The present study includes only
those larger, deeper lakes located in the subalpine and
alpine zones (n 5 533; surface area $0.5 ha, maximum
depth .3 m, elevation 2870–3600 m). We used this
restriction to reduce habitat variation among lakes and
to ensure that only those lakes capable of supporting
trout were considered. Lakes were visited once during
the survey, during 26 July–14 September 1995, 22
July–13 September 1996, or 29 June–14 September
1997. Most of the precipitation in the study area falls
as snow, and snowfall in 1995, 1996, and 1997 was
168%, 108%, and 100% of the mean, respectively (California
Department of Water Resources, online reports
DLYSWEQ.19950331, DLYSWEQ.19960331, DLYSWEQ.
19970331; accessed on 31 October 2000.)4
Prior to sampling, we used fish stocking records provided
by the California Department of Fish and Game
and National Park Service to divide the study lakes
into three categories based on their fish stocking histories.
These categories were (1) lakes that were never
stocked (‘‘never-stocked’’; n 5 215), (2) lakes that
were stocked at least once and still contained a trout
population due to continued stocking or natural reproduction
(‘‘stocked-fish-present’’; n 5 289), and (3)
lakes that were stocked at least once, but no longer
contained trout due to a halt to stocking and a lack of
spawning habitat (‘‘stocked-now-fishless’’; n 5 29).
Stocked-now-fishless lakes included only those that
had been fishless for $5 yr (range 5 5–59 yr). Stocking
records were also used to estimate the year in which
each stocked-now-fishless lake reverted to a fishless
condition. We assumed that trout disappeared from individual
lakes 10 yr after the last stocking. This assumption
was based on a mean maximum trout age in
the study area of 8.3 yr (range 5 2–16, SD 5 2.8),
which we determined by aging 1570 fish collected from
103 lakes (see Methods: Fish surveys). This assumption
is further supported by the fact that all four lakes that
were surveyed 10–15 yr after the last stocking date
were found to be fishless.
We used these three lake categories (never-stocked,
stocked-fish-present, stocked-now-fishless) to quantify
(1) the impacts of fish introductions (resistance) by
comparing faunal assemblages of never-stocked vs.
stocked-fish-present lakes, (2) the ability of communities
to recover from the perturbation caused by trout
introductions (resilience) by comparing faunal assemblages
of never-stocked vs. stocked-now-fishless lakes,
and (3) recovery rates and trajectories by comparing
species composition of stocked-now-fishless lakes that
had been fishless for 5–10, 11–20, and .20 yr.
Fish surveys
To verify the presence/absence of trout in each lake,
we used visual encounter surveys and gillnets. In relatively
small, shallow water bodies in which the entire
bottom could be seen, trout presence/absence was determined
visually while walking the entire shoreline
and the first 100 m of each inlet and outlet stream (n
5 35). In larger, deeper water bodies, we determined
fish presence/absence and species composition using a
single monofilament gill net set for 8–12 h combined
with a visual survey (n 5 498).
Amphibian surveys
Mountain yellow-legged frogs (Rana muscosa) were
the most common amphibian species in our study lakes.
Other amphibian species (Hyla regilla, Bufo canorus)
were found primarily in shallow ponds and were too
rare in our lakes to be included in this study. Surveys
for the mountain yellow-legged frog were conducted
at all 533 study lakes. The number of frogs at each
water body was determined using visual encounter surveys
(Crump and Scott 1994) of the entire shoreline.
During the summer, adults and larvae occur almost
exclusively in shallow water near shore and are easily
detected even in the deepest lakes by shoreline searches
(Bradford 1989). In addition, larvae overwinter 2–3
times before metamorphosing into subadult frogs, and
larvae are therefore present in lakes year-round. As a
result, visual surveys produce counts of mountain yellow-
legged frogs that are highly repeatable between
years (Knapp and Matthews 2000). If frogs were present,
we counted the number of adult (i.e., post-metamorphic)
frogs and larvae. Frog density (number of
individuals/m of shoreline) was calculated by dividing
the total number of adults or larvae by the lake perimeter.
Lake perimeters were obtained from a geographic
information system (GIS).
Benthic macroinvertebrate sampling
Benthic macroinvertebrate samples were collected
from a subset of the 533 study lakes. Samples were
collected from 67 never-stocked lakes, 100 stockedfish-
present lakes, and 22 stocked-now-fishless lakes,
selected at random. Benthic macroinvertebrates were
sampled from the littoral zone of each lake by conducting
15 standard sweeps with a D-net (mesh size 5
1 mm). A standard sweep consisted of a 1-m sweep in
one direction followed immediately by a 1-m sweep
across the same area in the opposite direction. D-net
zooplankton
in each subsample were identified and counted
in a Sedgwick-Rafter cell at 403 under a compound
microscope. Depending on the abundance of zooplankton,
from 1 to 30% of each sample was counted. Crustaceans
were identified using Edmondson (1959) and
Pennak (1989), and rotifers were identified using Stemberger
(1979). Crustaceans and rotifers were identified
to species except for cyclopoid copepods, which were
identified to family (Cyclopoda), and the rotifers Kellicottia,
Keratella, and Polyarthra, which were identified
to genus. The density of each taxon (number of
individuals/L) was calculated assuming a net efficiency
of 50% (Walters and Vincent 1973). For each sample,
up to 100 individuals of each taxon were measured
using a computer-based image analysis system.
Habitat description
To allow comparison of the physical attributes of
never-stocked, stocked-fish-present, and stocked-nowfishless
lakes, we used information on lake elevation,
surface area, maximum depth, littoral zone substrate
composition, isolation from other waterbodies, and solar
input. Lake surface area was obtained from a GIS
and lake elevation was obtained from 1:24 000 U.S.
Geological Survey topographic maps. Maximum lake
depth was determined by sounding with a weighted
line. Littoral zone substrate composition was quantified
by visually estimating the dominant substrate along
;50, 3-m long transects evenly spaced around the lake
perimeter and placed perpendicular to shore. Substrates
were categorized as silt (,0.5 mm), sand (0.5–2 mm),
gravel (.2–75 mm), cobble (.75–300 mm), boulder
(.300 mm), or bedrock. The frequencies of these substrate
categories were highly intercorrelated (e.g., lakes
with abundant silt had little boulder or bedrock substrates)
so only the percentage of the littoral zone dominated
by silt was used to describe littoral zone substrate
characteristics. Two measures of water body isolation,
the number of lakes (water bodies with surface
area $0.5 ha) within 1 km of the shoreline of each
study lake and the number of ponds (water bodies with
surface area ,0.5 ha) within 250 m of the shoreline of
each study lake, were calculated using a GIS. For these
isolation measures, only water bodies within the same
drainage as the target lake were considered because we
assumed that the movement of frogs, benthic macroinvertebrates,
and zooplankton among lakes was most
likely to occur within, rather than between drainages.
Solar input, used as a surrogate for water temperature
and the duration of the ice-free period, was calculated
for each water body using the program SOLARFLUX
(Dubayah and Rich 1995). SOLARFLUX calculates direct-
beam radiation across a digital elevation model
according to slope and aspect. We first divided the
study area into 10 3 10-m cells by inputting 50 m
contour intervals from USGS digital line graphs into
the TOPOGRID algorithm in Arc/Info version 7.1
(ESRI 1992). Next, we estimated the daily radiation
received by a particular lake by calculating radiation
loads for each cell whose center lay within the water
body. Radiation loads were calculated for all daylight
hours using a 1-h time step and then averaged across
time steps and across all cells associated with that water
body. Daily radiation was calculated on the longest and
shortest days of the year and on the days halfway between
the longest and shortest days of the year. Radiation
levels for these four dates were highly correlated
and were averaged to produce a single relative
measure of mean daily solar radiation.
Statistical analyses
Comparisons of faunal assemblages between the
three lake categories were made only for common taxa
(amphibians found in $10% of all 533 study lakes,
invertebrate taxa found in $10% of the 189 analyzed
benthic samples or the 177 analyzed zooplankton samples).
Rare taxa (present in ,10% of all samples) were
eliminated because sample sizes associated with these
taxa were too small to allow meaningful comparisons
between lake categories. Given that rare taxa occurred
in only a small number of samples in each lake category
and, when present, made up a small proportion of the
total sample, the inclusion of only common taxa in this
study should not have introduced any biases into our
analyses. For benthic invertebrates, rare taxa occurred
in 1–15 (1–8%) of the 189 samples that were collected
(median 5 2 samples), never occurred in .18% of the
samples from any one lake category, and were uncommon
even in those lakes where they were present (median
5 6% of the total individuals per sample). Two
of the 189 samples (one from a never-stocked lake, one
from a stocked-fish-present lake) were eliminated from
the data set because they contained only rare taxa. Similarly,
rare zooplankton taxa occurred in 1–17 (1–10%)
of the 177 samples that were processed (median 5 2
samples), never occurred in .16% of the samples from
any one lake category, and were uncommon even in
those lakes where they were present (median 5 3% of
the total individuals per sample). None of the 177 zooplankton
samples were eliminated from the data set as
all contained at least one common taxon.
Benthic macroinvertebrate taxa were divided into
three groups based on their likely vulnerability to predatory
trout. ‘‘Clinger/swimmer’’ taxa were those that
cling to substrate surfaces (e.g., mayfly larvae) or swim
up in the water column (e.g., water beetles) and are
therefore likely to be highly vulnerable to trout. ‘‘Casedwelling’’
taxa were caddisfly larvae (Order Trichoptera),
taxa that cling to substrate surfaces but reside in
a self-constructed case or web that might afford some
protection from predators. The third group included the
burrowing taxa, Sialis, Pisidium, and Oligochaeta, and
the distasteful taxon, Acari (mites; Smith and Cook
1991). ‘‘Burrowing/distasteful’’ taxa should be the
least vulnerable to predatory trout due to their inconspicuousness
or unpalatability.
We compared the frequency of occurrence (percentage
of lakes) of frogs, benthic macroinvertebrates, and
zooplankton between never-stocked lakes vs. stockedfish-
present lakes and never-stocked lakes vs. stockednow-
fishless lakes using Pearson’s chi-square tests
when expected values were .5 and Fisher’s exact tests
when expected values were #5. We did not test the
significance of the overall 3 3 2 table (presence/absence
of a particular taxon in the three lake categories)
because we were not interested in the comparison of
stocked-fish-present lakes vs. stocked-now-fishless
lakes. To allow comparison between taxa of the magnitude
of differences in percent occurrence in neverstocked
and stocked-fish-present lakes, we calculated
an ‘‘effect size’’ as percentage of occurrence in Category
1 divided by percentage of occurrence in Category
2 (where Category 1 was the lake category with the
higher percentage of occurrence). We compared abundances
of frogs, benthic macroinvertebrates, and zooplankton
in never-stocked vs. stocked-fish-present
lakes and in never-stocked vs. stocked-now-fishless
lakes using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. We used a nonparametric
test because it often was not possible to
normalize distributions or stabilize variances via transformation.
Results for frog adults and larvae were similar,
so only results based on larvae are presented.
We used nonmetric multidimensional scaling
(NMMDS) to ask whether there were significant differences
in overall community structure between the
three lake categories. NMMDS is an ordination technique
based on ranked distances, and is better suited
to data that are not normally distributed (such as most
animal abundance data) than more commonly used linear
techniques (e.g., principal components analysis;
Minchin 1987, Clarke 1993). Ordinations were based
on abundances of all taxa found in $10% of samples.
Rare taxa generally have little influence on ordinations
(Jongman et al. 1995), and preliminary analyses of our
data indicated little difference between ordinations using
all observed taxa and those using only common
taxa. Absolute abundances were log10(x 1 1) transformed,
and benthic macroinvertebrate and zooplankton
data were analyzed separately. Ordinations were
performed using the ‘‘autopilot’’ mode in PC-ORD v.
4.14 (McCune and Mefford 1999). The optimal dimensionality
(i.e., the number of dimensions beyond
which additional dimensions provide only small reductions
in stress) was first determined using 40 ‘‘runs’’
performed on the real data followed by 50 runs using
randomized data, with each run stepping down in dimensionality
from six axes to one axis. The final ordination
was then obtained using the optimal dimensionality
(optimal dimensionality 5 3 for both the benthic
macroinvertebrate and zooplankton data) and the
best starting configuration as determined from the previous
runs. Differences in NMMDS scores between the
three lake categories were analyzed using one-way ANOVAs
and Tukey’s HSD tests. To provide information
on the rates and trajectories of recovery, we also divided
the NMMDS scores for the stocked-now-fishless
lakes into three categories based on the time since fish
disappearance: 5–10 yr, 11–20 yr, and .20 yr. To simplify
the graphical display of the ordination results,
only two of the three NMMDS axes were used to define
the ordination space. The two axes used in these figures
were those that showed the strongest associations with
fish stocking history.
To determine whether the effect of lake category
(never-stocked, stocked-fish-present, stocked-nowfishless)
on benthic macroinvertebrate and zooplankton
assemblages was confounded by differences among
categories in habitat characteristics and sampling date,
we used univariate and multivariate analyses of variance.
We first used one-way ANOVAs and Tukey’s
HSD tests to determine whether habitat variables differed
between the three lake categories, using the entire
lake data set (n 5 533). One-way ANOVAs based only
on the subset of lakes for which we had zooplankton
data or benthic macroinvertebrate data provided results
that were identical to those based on the full data set
and were therefore not reported separately. Independent
variables analyzed were elevation, depth, surface area,
percentage of the littoral zone dominated by silt, number
of lakes within 1 km of the lake shoreline, number
of ponds within 250 m of the lake shoreline, solar input,
and sampling date (expressed as the number of days
since January 1). Because significant differences in independent
variables were observed between lake categories,
we then used MANCOVAs to evaluate the influence
of lake category on benthic macroinvertebrate
and zooplankton assemblages after accounting for the
effects of habitat and sampling date. Benthic macroinvertebrate
and zooplankton data were analyzed separately.
Response variables were the NMMDS scores on
axes 1, 2, and 3 (optimal dimensionality 5 3) for the
benthic macroinvertebrate or zooplankton data, and independent
variables included lake category and all
eight variables related to habitat and sampling date.
Prior to univariate and multivariate analyses, we normalized
these data by applying log10 transformations
to depth and area, a log10(x 1 1) transformation to the
number of ponds within 250 m, and an angular transformation
to percentage of littoral zone composed of
silt. We were unable to perform a similar analysis on
the amphibian data because of a large number of zeros
in the response variable, larval abundance.
MANCOVAs indicated that some habitat variables
and sampling dates had significant effects on NMMDS
scores (see Results). Therefore, to evaluate the effect
of differences in habitat between lake categories on the
outcome of the ordination analyses, we ‘‘corrected’’
the NMMDS scores using multiple linear regression
with scores from each of the three NMMDS axes as
the dependent variable and all eight habitat and sampling
date measures as independent variables. Regression
analyses were conducted in a stepwise manner,
using both forward and backward selection. Residuals
obtained from the resulting regression equations represent
the effect of fish, other unmeasured factors that
influenced NMMDS scores, and error. These residuals
were used instead of the raw NMMDS scores in oneway
ANOVAs and Tukey HSD tests. While this procedure
eliminated habitat effects on NMMDS scores,
it could also have removed some effects that were actually
associated with fish. Unintentional removal of
fish effects would have resulted whenever fish presence/
absence was associated with habitat differences.
Because fish presence/absence was not included in the
regression analysis, any effect due to fish but associated
with habitat effects would have been attributed to the
associated habitat effects and subsequently corrected
for.


xresults
Adequacy of treatment contrasts
Never-stocked, stocked-fish-present, and stockednow-
fishless lakes were similar in physical characteristics
and sampling date, although significant differences
between lake categories were observed for most
variables (Fig. 1). Overall differences between lake categories
were statistically significant (P # 0.05) for six
of the eight variables (elevation, depth, surface area,
percentage of littoral zone composed of silt, number
of lakes within 1 km, number of ponds within 250 m),
marginally nonsignificant for sampling date (P 5 0.08),
and nonsignificant for solar input (P 5 0.24). Pairwise
differences between (1) never-stocked and stockedfish-
present lakes, (2) never-stocked and stocked-nowfishless
lakes, and (3) stocked-fish-present and stockednow-
fishless lakes were statistically significant (Tukey’s
HSD, P , 0.05) for six of eight variables, two
of eight variables, and one of eight variables, respectively
(Fig. 1). Comparisons between never-stocked
and stocked-fish-present lakes had high statistical power
(.0.9) as a result of relatively large sample sizes (n
5 215 and 289, respectively); as a result, even small
differences in habitat variables were often found to be
statistically significant.
For both the benthic macroinvertebrate and zooplankton
assemblages, MANCOVAs indicated that lake
category had highly significant effects on NMMDS
scores after the influence of habitat and sampling date
was accounted for (Pillai-Bartlett trace: benthic macroinvertebrates,
n 5 187, PB 5 0.50, P , 0.0001;
zooplankton, n 5 177, PB 5 0.30, P , 0.0001). In
addition to lake category, benthic macroinvertebrate
NMMDS scores were influenced by sample date (P 5
0.03), elevation (P , 0.0001), maximum lake depth (P
5 0.0002), percentage of littoral zone composed of silt
(P 5 0.0002), and number of ponds within a 250 m
radius (P 5 0.04). Zooplankton NMMDS scores were
influenced by elevation (P 5 0.001) and lake area (P
, 0.0001). Taken together, these results indicate that
while we were not completely successful in creating
lake categories that eliminated all between-category
differences in habitat characteristics, the strong effects
of lake category on faunal assemblage structure were
independent of the confounding influences of habitat
variables.
Amphibians
Mountain yellow-legged frog larvae were much less
likely to be found in stocked-fish-present lakes than in
never-stocked lakes (P , 0.001; Fig. 2A). Densities of
frog larvae were also much lower in stocked-fish-present
lakes than in never-stocked lakes (P , 0.001; Fig.
2B). Frogs appeared to recover after fish disappearance,
as percentage of occurrence and density were very similar
between never-stocked and stocked-now-fishless
lakes (Fig. 2A, B). Neither difference approached statistical
significance (P . 0.8). For lakes that had been
fishless for 5–10 yr, 11–20 yr, or .20 yr, mountain
yellow-legged frog larvae were found in 0% (n 5 5),
20% (n 5 10), and 28% (n 5 14), respectively. Abundance
of frog larvae showed a similar pattern, and together
with the frequency data suggest that recovery
of frog populations may require .10 yr after fish disappearance.
Benthic macroinvertebrates
As predicted, five of the six ‘‘clinger/swimmer’’ taxa
were found in a lower percentage of stocked-fish-present
lakes than in never-stocked lakes (Fig. 3A). For
these five taxa, differences were most marked for the
largest taxa (Ameletus, Callibaetis, Agabus, Corixidae;
median effect size 5 13.2) and least marked for the
smallest taxon (Hydroporini; effect size 5 1.4). In contrast
to the reduced occurrence of these five taxa, Culex
(mosquito larvae) were found in a much higher percentage
of stocked-fish-present lakes than in neverstocked
lakes (P , 0.001; Fig. 3A). Similar patterns
were found for taxon-specific abundance data (Fig.
4A), with Ameletus, Callibaetis, Agabus, Corixidae,
and Hydroporini all less abundant (P , 0.001) and
Culex more abundant (P , 0.001) in stocked-fish-present
lakes compared to never-stocked lakes. The frequency
of occurrence and abundance for Culex increased
despite its similar size to clinger/swimmer taxa
whose frequencies of occurrence were reduced in the
presence of trout (Fig. 3A).
At least four of the six clinger/swimmer taxa appeared
to recover completely after fish disappearance,
as indicated by the similar percent occurrence and
abundance of Ameletus, Callibaetis, Culex, and Hydroporini
in stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked
lakes (Poccur . 0.60, Pabund . 0.3; Figs. 3A, 4A). The
percent occurrence and abundance of Agabus was lower
in stocked-now-fishless lakes than in never-stocked
lakes (Figs. 3A, 4A), although these differences were
not statistically significant (Poccur 5 0.26, Pabund 5 0.13).
Percent occurrence and abundance of corixids was
higher in stocked-now-fishless than never-stocked
lakes (Figs. 3A, 4A), but only differences in abundance
approached statistical significance (Poccur 5 0.12, Pabund
5 0.053).
Contrary to expectation, the percentage occurrence
and abundance of four of the five caddisfly taxa (Limnephilidae:
Hesperophylax, Desmona, Psychoglypha;
Polycentropidae: Polycentropus) were lower in
stocked-fish-present lakes than in never-stocked lakes
(P , 0.003; Figs. 3B, 4B). Limnephilus (Limnephilidae)
was found in a similar percentage of stocked-fishpresent
and never-stocked lakes (P 5 0.71; Fig. 3B)
and at similar abundances (P 5 0.19; Fig. 4B). The
lack of a fish effect on Limnephilus did not appear to
be related to its size, as its size was similar to that of
taxa whose frequencies of occurrence and abundances
were reduced by fish (Fig. 3B). However, across all five
caddisfly taxa, body size was weakly correlated with
effect size (n 5 5, r 5 0.84, P 5 0.08).
Of the four caddisfly taxa whose distributions were
influenced by the presence of fish, at least one (Desmona)
completely recovered after fish disappearance.
Desmona had a similar percentage of occurrence and
abundance in stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked
lakes (P . 0.30; Figs. 3B, 4B). Hesperophylax, Polycentropus,
and Psychoglypha were found in fewer
stocked-now-fishless lakes than in never-stocked lakes
(Fig. 3B), but these differences approached statistical
significance only for Polycentropus (PHe 5 0.31, PPo 5
0.08, PPs 5 0.17). Abundances of these three taxa were
also lower in stocked-now-fishless lakes than in neverstocked
lakes (Fig. 4B). These differences were marginally
nonsignificant for Polycentropus and Psychoglypha
(P 5 0.06), but were not significant for Hesperophylax
(P 5 0.20). Therefore, Polycentropus and Psychoglypha
may not have completely recovered after
fish disappearance. The frequency of occurrence and
abundance of Limnephilus, a taxon not affected by trout
presence, was similar between stocked-now-fishless
and never-stocked lakes (Poccur 5 0.30, Pabund 5 0.20;
Figs. 3B, 4B)
As predicted, the distribution and abundance of two
burrowing taxa, alderfly larvae (Sialidae: Sialis) and
freshwater clams (Sphaeridae: Pisidium), were similar
between never-stocked and stocked-fish-present lakes
(P . 0.40; Figs. 3C, 4C). In contrast, one burrowing
taxon, oligochaetes (Oligochaeta), and one distasteful
taxon, mites (Acari), occurred more frequently and
were more abundant in stocked-fish-present lakes than
in never-stocked lakes (P , 0.007; Figs. 3C, 4C). After
fish disappearance, oligochaete frequency and abundance
returned to levels similar to that in never-stocked
lakes (Poccur . 0.40, Pabund . 0.20; Figs. 3C, 4C). The
frequency of occurrence and abundance of mites also
decreased after fish disappearance, but both were lower
(marginally nonsignificant) in stocked-now-fishless
lakes than in never-stocked lakes (P 5 0.06; Figs. 3C,
4C). Sialis and Pisidium, taxa that were not affected
by trout presence, had similar distributions and abundances
in stocked-now-fishless vs. never-stocked lakes
(P . 0.50; Figs. 3C, 4C)
The non-metric multidimensional scaling analysis of
the benthic macroinvertebrate community generally
supported the results of the taxon-specific analyses.
NMMDS Axes 1, 2, and 3 accounted for 68% of the
total variation in the ordination (r2 5 0.16, 0.18, and
0.34, respectively; NMMDS axis numbers are arbitrary,
so that percent of variance on a given axis does
not necessarily decrease with increasing axis number;
stress 5 20.0). NMMDS scores on Axis 1 were not
significantly different between lake categories (F2, 184
5 0.2, P . 0.8), while differences in scores between
lake categories on Axis 2 and 3 were highly significant
(Fig. 5A; Axis 2: F2, 184 5 11.4, P , 0.0001; Axis 3:
F2, 184 5 51.2, P , 0.0001). Taxa showing significant
negative correlations with Axis 2 or positive correlations
with Axis 3 were generally those associated with
fishless lakes (Table 1). These included mayfly nymphs
(Ameletus, Callibaetis), corixids (Corixidae), dytiscid
beetles (Hydroporini), and caddisfly larvae (Desmona,
Polycentropus, Psychoglypha). Taxa showing significant
positive correlations with Axis 2 or negative correlations
with Axis 3 were generally those associated
with fish-containing lakes (Table 1). These included
mosquito larvae (Culex), oligochaetes (Oligochaeta),
and clams (Pisidium). Taxa that showed significant correlations
with Axis 1 showed no obvious pattern related
to fish effects (Table 1). The strong influence of fish
on the benthic invertebrate community was shown by
the significantly different scores of never-stocked and
stocked-fish-present lakes on NMMDS Axis 2 and 3
(Fig. 5A; Tukey’s HSD, P , 0.05). The significant
difference between stocked-fish-present and stocked
now-fishless lakes on Axis 2 and 3 (Tukey’s HSD, P
, 0.05) and the lack of a significant difference between
stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked lakes on Axis
2 and 3 (Fig. 5A; Tukey’s HSD, P . 0.05) suggest that
the benthic invertebrate community was able to recover
to its previous configuration after fish disappearance.
The strong similarity in mean NMMDS scores for
stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked lakes on both
Axis 2 and 3 (Fig. 5A) indicates that the lack of a
statistically significant difference between these two
lake categories was not simply the result of statistical
power being too low to detect a difference.
Fish disappearance was followed by a steady and
predictable change in the benthic macroinvertebrate
community away from that characteristic of stockedfish-
present lakes and toward that characteristic of never-
stocked lakes (Fig. 5B). The largest changes in community
structure occurred in the first 5–20 yr after fish
disappearance, followed by negligible changes after
.20 yr when mean community structure was nearly
identical to that of never-stocked lakes.
Correcting NMMDS scores for habitat differences
between lake categories had little effect on the ordination
results. Stepwise multiple regression results
used to correct the NMMDS scores are shown in Table
2. As with uncorrected scores, NMMDS scores on Axis
1 were not significantly different between lake categories
(F2, 184 5 0.1, P . 0.9), while differences in
scores between lake categories on Axis 2 and 3 were
highly significant (Axis 2: F2, 184 5 8.0, P , 0.0005;
Axis 3: F2, 184 5 17.2, P , 0.0001). In addition, in
comparisons between never-stocked and stocked-fishpresent
lakes on Axis 2 and 3, corrected NMMDS
scores were significantly different (Tukey’s HSD, P ,
0.05) as were corrected NMMDS scores between
stocked-fish-present and stocked-now-fishless lakes on
Axis 2 and 3 (Tukey’s HSD, P , 0.05). Differences
between corrected NMMDS scores between stockednow-
fishless and never-stocked lakes on Axis 2 and 3
were not significant (Tukey’s HSD, P . 0.05). Taken
together, the lack of any significant changes in ordination
results after accounting for habitat differences
between lake categories suggests that lake stocking his
tories, not habitat effects, were largely responsible for
the observed patterns.
Zooplankton
For the analyzed zooplankton samples, the mean volume
filtered by the zooplankton net during sample collection
(61 SD) was 1.47 6 1.00 m3 with a range of
0.25–6.15 m3. The volume filtered per sample was not
significantly different between lake categories (ANOVA;
n 5 177, F2, 174 5 0.95, P . 0.3). The median
number of individuals counted per sample was 243,
with a range of 2–7689.
Six crustacean taxa were commonly found in the
study lakes, and the two largest (.1 mm; Hesperodiaptomus
shoshone, Daphnia middendorffiana) were
found much less often in stocked-fish-present lakes
than in never-stocked lakes (P , 0.001; Fig. 6A). The
remaining four taxa had mean sizes ,1 mm, and three
of these taxa (Leptodiaptomus signicauda, Daphnia rosea,
Chydorus sphaericus) were found in a similar percentage
of stocked-fish-present and never-stocked lakes
(PLe 5 0.22, PDr 5 0.26, PCh 5 0.88; Fig. 6A). Cyclopoda
were more likely to be found in stocked-fishpresent
than in never-stocked lakes, although this difference
was marginally nonsignificant (P 5 0.06; Fig.
6A). Zooplankton abundance data showed similar patterns,
with H. shoshone and D. middendorffiana being
less abundant in stocked-fish-present lakes than in never-
stocked lakes (P , 0.001; Fig. 7A), and L. signicauda,
D. rosea, and C. sphaericus having similar
abundances in stocked-fish-present and never-stocked
lakes (PLe 5 0.13, PDr 5 0.18, PCh 5 0.97; Fig. 7A).
Cyclopoids were more abundant in stocked-fish-present
lakes than in never-stocked lakes (P 5 0.03; Fig. 7A).
Due to a highly non-normal distribution, the mean
abundance of cyclopoids in stocked-fish-present and
never-stocked lakes shown in Fig. 7A does not reflect
the relatively large differences in ranked data that were
used in the statistical analysis.
Of the five common rotifer taxa, three were found
in a similar percentage of stocked-fish-present and never-
stocked lakes (Kellicottia sp., Conochilus unicornis,
Keratella spp.; PKl 5 0.75, PCo 5 0.37, PKs 5 0.25;
Fig. 6B) and two (Keratella quadrata, Polyarthra spp.)
were found in a higher percentage of stocked-fish-present
lakes than never-stocked lakes. These differences
were significant for K. quadrata (P 5 0.012; Fig. 6B)
and marginally nonsignificant for Polyarthra spp. (P
5 0.07; Fig. 6B). Rotifer abundances showed stronger
effects of trout than did presence/absence data, with
abundances of Keratella quadrata, Keratella spp., and
Polyarthra spp. all being significantly higher in
stocked-fish-present lakes than in never-stocked lakes
(P , 0.006; Fig. 7B). Abundances of Kellicottia spp.
and C. unicornis were similar between stocked-fishpresent
and never-stocked lakes (PKl 5 0.78, PCo 5
0.24; Fig. 7B).
The two crustacean species that were strongly affected
by fish presence (H. shoshone and D. middendorffiana)
were both able to recover after fish disappearance.
The frequency of occurrence and abundance
of these two taxa were similar between stocked-nowfishless
and never-stocked lakes (Poccur . 0.80, Pabund .
0.30; Figs. 6A, 7A). The frequency of occurrence of
D. rosea and Cyclopoda was higher in stocked-nowfishless
lakes than in never-stocked lakes (Fig. 6A), but
neither difference was statistically significant (PDr 5
0.13, PCy 5 0.15). The abundances of D. rosea and
Cyclopoda were also higher in stocked-now-fishless
lakes than in never-stocked lakes, but these differences
approached statistical significance only for D. rosea
(PDr 5 0.07, PCy 5 0.12; Fig. 7A). The large, but nonsignificant
difference in mean abundance of cyclopoid
copepods was the result of only two of 26 stockednow-
fishless lakes containing cyclopoids, but both
lakes having high densities of this taxon. The percent
occurrence and abundance of L. signicauda and C.
sphaericus were similar between never-stocked and
stocked-now-fishless lakes (Poccur . 0.3, Pabund . 0.4;
Figs. 6A, 7A). Of the three rotifer taxa whose distributions
or abundances increased in the presence of fish
(K. quadrata, Keratella spp., Polyarthra spp.), all appeared
to return to predisturbance levels after fish disappearance.
Frequencies of occurrence and abundances
of Keratella spp. and K. quadrata were similar in
stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked lakes (Poccur .
0.50, Pabund . 0.20; Figs. 6B, 7B). Polyarthra spp. was
also found in a similar percentage of stocked-now-fishless
and never-stocked lakes (P 5 0.75; Fig. 6B), but
its abundance was lower in stocked-now-fishless lakes
than in never-stocked lakes. The latter difference was
not statistically significant, however (P 5 0.71; Fig.
7B). The percentage of occurrence and abundance of
Kellicottia sp. and C. unicornis were similar between
stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked lakes (occurrence,
PKe 5 0.37, PCo 5 0.72; abundance, PKe 5 0.27,
PCo 5 0.53).
A nonmetric multidimensional scaling analysis of
the zooplankton community generally confirmed the
results of the taxon-specific analyses. Axes 1, 2, and
3 accounted for 74% of the variation in the ordination
(r2 5 0.23, 0.13, and 0.37, respectively; stress 5 17.0).
NMMDS scores on Axis 1 were not significantly different
between lake categories (F2, 174 5 0.4, P . 0.6),
while differences in scores between lake categories
were marginally significant on Axis 2 (Fig. 8A; F2, 174
5 2.9, P 5 0.06) and highly significant on Axis 3 (Fig.
8A; F2, 174 5 28.8, P , 0.0001). Taxa showing positive
correlations with Axis 3 were those associated with
fishless lakes (H. shoshone, D. middendorffiana; Table
3) while those showing negative correlations with Axis
3 were those associated with fish-containing lakes (L.
signicauda, D. rosea, Cyclopoda, Kellicottia sp., K.
quadrata, C. unicornis, Keratella spp., and Polyarthra
spp.; Table 3). Taxa significantly correlated with Axis
1 and 2 did not show any obvious association with fish,
but taxa positively correlated with Axis 1 were gen
erally those with high abundances (Table 3). The strong
influence of fish on the zooplankton community was
shown by the significantly different scores of neverstocked
and stocked-fish-present lakes on Axis 3 (Fig.
8A; Tukey’s HSD, P , 0.05). The significant difference
between stocked-fish-present and stocked-now-fishless
lakes on Axis 3 (Tukey’s HSD, P , 0.05) and the lack
of a significant difference between stocked-now-fishless
lakes and never-stocked lakes on Axis 3 (Fig. 8A;
Tukey’s HSD, P . 0.05) suggest that the zooplankton
community was able to recover to its previous configuration
after fish disappearance. The similarity in mean
NMMDS scores for stocked-now-fishless and neverstocked
lakes on both Axis 2 and 3 (Fig. 8A) indicates
that the lack of a statistically significant difference between
these two lake categories was not simply the
result of statistical power being too low to detect a
difference.
As with the benthic macroinvertebrate community,
fish disappearance was followed by a steady change in
the zooplankton community away from that characteristic
of stocked-fish-present lakes and toward that characteristic
of never-stocked lakes (Fig. 8B). Eleven to
twenty years were required before the configuration of
the zooplankton community in stocked-now-fishless
lakes approached that of never-stocked lakes. Changes
in community configuration after 20 yr were negligible.
The correction of NMMDS scores for habitat differences
between lake categories had little effect on the
ordination results. Stepwise multiple regression results
used to correct the NMMDS scores are shown in Table
4. As with uncorrected scores, corrected NMMDS
scores on Axis 1 were not significantly different between
lake categories (F2, 174 5 0.1, P . 0.6) but were
significantly different on Axis 3 (Axis 3, F2, 184 5 17.2,
P , 0.0001). The stepwise multiple regression of Axis
2 against all habitat variables resulted in no habitat
variables being included in the model (Table 4), so no
correction was possible. In comparisons between never-
stocked and stocked-fish-present lakes, corrected
Axis 3 NMMDS scores were significantly different (Tukey’s
HSD, P , 0.05) as were corrected Axis 3
NMMDS scores between stocked-fish-present and
stocked-now-fishless lakes (Tukey’s HSD, P , 0.05).
Differences between corrected NMMDS scores for
stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked lakes on Axis
3 were not significant (Tukey’s HSD, P . 0.05). Taken
together, the lack of any significant changes in ordination
results after correcting for habitat differences
between lake categories suggests that lake stocking histories,
not habitat effects, were largely responsible for
the observed patterns.

xdiscussion
Comparisons of the faunal assemblages between
never-stocked, stocked-fish-present, and stocked-nowfishless
lakes indicate that the introduction of trout into
fishless alpine lakes in the Sierra Nevada caused dramatic
changes in the configuration of these communities,
and that most common taxa recovered after trout
disappeared. The changes associated with trout introductions
into our study lakes are consistent with those
reported in other studies of fish effects on mountain
lake faunal assemblages (United States: Bahls 1990,
Stoddard 1987, Bradford et al. 1998, Carlisle and Hawkins
1998, Tyler et al. 1998, Knapp and Matthews
2000; Canada: Anderson 1980, McNaught et al. 1999;
Spain: Bran˜a et al. 1996), and suggest that effects of
introduced trout on high elevation lakes are remarkably
consistent across geographically disparate areas. The
community-level response to fish disappearance has
rarely been studied, but our results showing recovery
by most taxa are similar to those reported by the few
studies that have evaluated the resilience of faunal assemblages
(Keller and Yan 1991, Locke and Sprules
1994, Mittelbach et al. 1995, Yan et al. 1996, Harig
and Bain 1998; but see Parker et al. 1996, Frost et al.
1998).
Resistance of amphibian populations
Comparisons between never-stocked and stockedfish-
present lakes indicated that the distribution and
abundance of mountain yellow-legged frog larvae was
dramatically reduced by introduced trout. These results
are consistent with those of Bradford (1989), Bradford
et al. (1998), and Knapp and Matthews (2000), all of
which suggested that predation by introduced trout has
contributed to the decline of the mountain yellow-leg
ged frog in the Sierra Nevada. Similar negative effects
of fishes on other amphibians have also been reported
(Macan 1966, Bro¨nmark and Edenhamn 1994, Bran˜a
et al. 1996, Gamradt and Kats 1996, Hecnar and
M’Closkey 1997, Tyler et al. 1998, Goodsell and Kats
1999). Negative effects of fish may be particularly
strong for amphibians such as the mountain yellowlegged
frog that require permanent water bodies for
successful reproduction and overwintering (Knapp and
Matthews 2000). Amphibians that are able to breed in
temporary (and therefore fishless) habitats and have
adult stages that overwinter in areas free of fish (e.g.,
terrestrial habitats) should be much less affected by
fish introductions. Given that fish have been widely
introduced into naturally fishless habitats worldwide
(Nilsson 1972, Donald 1987, Bahls 1992, Bran˜a et al.
1996, Townsend 1996), exotic fishes may play a more
important role in global amphibian declines (Blaustein
and Wake 1990, 1995) than is generally recognized.
Resistance of the benthic macroinvertebrate
community
Introduced trout also had strong effects on the benthic
macroinvertebrate community, and these effects
were similar in direction and magnitude to those reported
for alpine lakes by Bradford et al. (1998) and
Carlisle and Hawkins (1998). Our results are also consistent
with the results of several previous studies of
fish effects on benthic macroinvertebrates conducted
in a wide variety of lentic habitats (e.g., Macan 1966,
Hall et al. 1970, Gilinsky 1984, Luecke 1990). In our
study, the frequency and abundance of most of the taxa
that swim up in the water column or cling to substrates,
including case dwellers, was reduced in stocked-fishpresent
lakes relative to never-stocked lakes. There
were two exceptions to this pattern; the distribution
and abundance of Limnephilus caddisfly larvae was unchanged
by the presence of fish, and more strikingly,
the distribution and abundance of mosquito larvae (Culex)
increased in the presence of fish. Although the
reason for the lack of a fish effect on Limnephilus is
unclear, one possibility is that its case, which is constructed
from organic materials, affords more effective
camouflage against the predominantly organic substrates
of the study lakes than do the sand-grain cases
of Psychoglypha, Desmona, and Hesperophylax, or the
web retreat of Polycentropus (Otto and Svensson
1980). The unexpected increase in Culex in stockedfish-
present lakes may be the result of the elimination
of invertebrate predators by fish. In our study lakes,
Culex larvae are typically found in dense littoral zone
aquatic vegetation. This habitat may provide a relatively
high degree of protection from trout but relatively
little protection from smaller invertebrate pred
ators such as dytiscid beetles (Nilsson and Svensson
1995), taxa whose abundances were significantly reduced
in our study by the presence of trout.
Our results indicated that burrowing or distasteful
taxa either were unaffected by trout presence, or, as in
the case of oligochaetes and mites, increased in the
presence of trout. Carlisle and Hawkins (1998) also
provided evidence that oligochaetes (Lumbriculus)
were more abundant in trout-containing lakes and suggested
that this could be the result of either decreased
interspecific competition or of trout enhancing food
availability to deposit feeding taxa such as oligochaetes
by increasing the flow of nutrients to lake bottoms (e.g.,
Leavitt et al. 1994). Given the relatively high abundances
of oligochaetes in alpine lakes, understanding
the causes and consequences of changes in the abundance
of this taxon may provide important insights into
the food web structure and energy flow in these systems
(Carlisle and Hawkins 1998).
Resistance of the zooplankton community
Comparisons between never-stocked and stockedfish-
present lakes showed that trout reduced the distribution
and abundance of large zooplankton. Similar
results have been reported in many others studies of
fish effects on zooplankton communities in alpine lakes
(Anderson 1980, Stoddard 1987, Bradford et al. 1998,
Carlisle and Hawkins 1998) and lentic systems in general
(Brooks and Dodson 1965, Northcote et al. 1978,
Vanni 1987, Mittelbach et al. 1995). Small crustacean
zooplankton taxa were relatively unaffected by the
presence of fish, with the exception of cyclopoid copepods
which increased in abundance. The abundance
of rotifer taxa also increased markedly in the presence
of fish, although changes in rotifer distribution were
small. Bradford et al. (1998), using presence/absence
data, reported no effects of trout on rotifers in Sierra
Nevada lakes. The similarity of our results based on
rotifer presence/absence data to those of Bradford et
al. (1998) but the much stronger effects we observed
based on abundance data highlights the importance of
using abundance data to better characterize the subtler
effects of fish on invertebrate communities. The positive
response of cyclopoids and rotifers to fish presence
is common in alpine lakes (Anderson 1972, Stoddard
1987, Carlisle and Hawkins 1998) and in other
lentic habitats (Vanni 1987, Gilbert 1988, Christofferson
et al. 1993). In alpine lakes, the increase in rotifer
abundance may result from the elimination of planktonic
predators (Hesperodiaptomus) and competitors
(Daphnia) by fish (Anderson 1980, Gilbert 1988, Paul
and Schindler 1994, Paul et al. 1995, Sarnelle 1997).
Resilience of amphibian populations
One of the most striking results of our study was
that mountain yellow-legged frog larvae recovered after
fish disappearance to levels typical of those in neverstocked
lakes. In light of the increasing alarm about
worldwide amphibian disappearances (Blaustein and
Wake 1990, 1995) and the likely role of introduced
fishes in a number of these declines, our results suggest
that some of these declines could be reversed simply
by removing trout from some of the lakes where they
have been introduced (Funk and Dunlap 1999). However,
because the mountain yellow-legged frog is closely
tied to water and apparently moves only relatively
short distances (Matthews and Pope 1999), recolonization
of lakes that have been returned to a fishless
condition may be strongly influenced by the proximity
of nearby source populations. This possibility is supported
by the fact that in our study, stocked-now-fishless
lakes that contained frogs were much more likely
to have one or more reproducing mountain yellowlegged
frog populations within 1 km than were stockednow-
fishless lakes that lacked frogs (77% vs. 5%; Fisher’s
exact test, n 5 29, P , 0.001).
The apparent importance of nearby source populations
for successful recolonization by the mountain yellow-
legged frog has important implications for the resilience
of this species. The majority of stocked-now
fishless lakes in our study lost their fish populations
.20 yr ago. Given that mountain yellow-legged frogs
have declined by .80% during the past century (Drost
and Fellers 1996) and remaining populations continue
to disappear (R. Knapp, unpublished data—apparently
as a result of habitat fragmentation and isolation by
introduced trout; Bradford et al. 1993), lakes that revert
to a fishless condition in the future will be increasingly
unlikely to be recolonized as the number of potential
frog source populations continues to diminish (Bradford
et al. 1993).
Resilience of the benthic invertebrate community
Although the benthic macroinvertebrate community
was profoundly altered by fish introductions, most taxa
appeared to recover after fish disappearance to levels
characteristic of never-stocked lakes, as did the configuration
of the benthic community as a whole. These
results support the conclusions of Niemi et al. (1990)
that lake benthic macroinvertebrate communities are
generally resilient to most disturbances that leave habitats
unimpaired. In our study, none of 15 taxa had
frequencies of occurrence that were significantly different
between stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked
lakes. All taxa in the clinger/swimmer category recovered
to levels at or above that of never-stocked lakes,
and this resilience may have been facilitated by the
strong flying abilities of their adult stages. Adult mayflies
are known to disperse tens of kilometers (Gibbs
et al. 1998), a distance sufficient to allow recolonization
of most stocked-now-fishless lakes by animals dispersing
from never-stocked lakes. Oligochaetes and
mites (burrowing/distasteful category) increased in the
presence of fish, but also returned to predisturbance
levels (or nearly so) after fish disappearance. Mites
were not found in any of the 22 stocked-now-fishless
lakes, but based on the occurrence of mites in only
15% of never-stocked lakes, they would only have been
expected to occur in three stocked-now-fishless lakes.
Therefore, our failure to detect mites in any of the
stocked-fishless lakes is likely the result of sampling
error and not recovery failure.
In contrast to the relatively high resilience of clinger/
swimmer and burrower/distasteful taxa, case-dwelling
caddisflies appeared to have relatively limited abilities
to recover after fish disappearance. While Desmona did
recover to predisturbance levels, Polycentropus and
Psychoglypha may have failed to do so. The reasons
for the low resilience of these taxa are unclear as little
natural history information is available. However, dispersal
by caddisflies is often relatively restricted (Kovats
et al. 1996, Bunn and Hughes 1997, Collier and
Smith 1997) and Sode and Wiberg-Larsen (1993) concluded
that because of this limited dispersal, recovery
of caddisflies after disturbance may often require decades.
Resilience of the zooplankton community
Despite the substantial alteration of the zooplankton
community by fish introductions, after fish disappearance
the distribution and abundance of most zooplankton
taxa returned to levels characteristic of neverstocked
lakes. This capacity to recovery after a disturbance
has also been reported for zooplankton communities
in other lentic ecosystems (Keller and Yan
1991, Locke and Sprules 1994, Mittelbach et al. 1995,
Yan et al. 1996, Harig and Bain 1998; but see Parker
et al. 1996, Frost et al. 1998). In our study, all of the
11 common taxa showed similar percent occurrences
in stocked-now-fishless and never-stocked lakes.
Abundances in stocked-now-fishless lakes and neverstocked
lakes were similar for all taxa except Daphnia
rosea, a species that was unaffected by fish introductions
but may have increased slightly after fish disappearance.
The reduction in rotifer abundances following
fish disappearance was probably a consequence
of an increase in the abundance of Hesperodiaptomus
shoshone and Daphnia middendorffiana to predisturbance
levels. Reintroduction of Hesperodiaptomus arcticus
into an alpine lake in the Canadian Rocky Mountains
also resulted in the rapid suppression of the rotifer
community (McNaught et al. 1999).
The recovery of H. shoshone and D. middendorffiana
after fish disappearance was likely facilitated by the
relatively long-lived resting eggs characteristic of these
two genera. Parker et al. (1996) presented evidence that
the resting egg bank of Hesperodiaptomus articus in
alpine lakes of the Canadian Rocky Mountains could
remain viable for at least 15–20 yr, and .100 yr-old
eggs of a related copepod, Diaptomus sanguineus, have
been hatched (Hairston et al. 1995). Similarly, resting
eggs of Daphnia can remain viable for .125 yr (Ca´-
ceres 1998). However, if resting eggs of H. shoshone
remain viable only for several decades (like those of
H. arcticus), recovery of H. shoshone may be much
less likely in lakes that return to a fishless condition
in the future than in the lakes used in this study. On
average, fish were first introduced to our stocked-nowfishless
lakes in the mid-1940s. By the time stocking
was halted and fish populations disappeared, these
lakes had harbored fish populations for a mean of only
29 yr. By contrast, lakes that were first stocked at the
same time but that still contain fish populations today
(either because of continued stocking or because of
natural reproduction) have had fish populations for .50
yr and may no longer contain a viable H. shoshone egg
bank (e.g., Parker et al. 1996). The possibility that the
resilience of H. shoshone populations is a function of
fish-occupancy time is supported by recent research in
which we used paleoecological analyses to establish
the historical occurrence of H. shoshone in 25 stockednow-
fishless lakes. H. shoshone reappeared in 86% of
those lakes that had contained an introduced trout population
for ,50 yr, while it failed to reappear in any
of the lakes that had contained a trout population for
.50 yr (R. Knapp and O. Sarnelle, unpublished data).
With depletion of the egg bank, the only means by
which H. shoshone could recolonize stocked-now-fishless
lakes is via over-land transfers from nearby H.
shoshone populations. The likelihood of such transfers
resulting in the successful reestablishment of a population
is likely to be very low (Boileau and Hebert
1988).
Conclusions
Our snapshot sampling of never-stocked, stockedfish-
present, and stocked-now-fishless lakes was successful
in providing a broad, albeit relatively coarsegrained
view of the resistance and resilience of amphibian,
benthic macroinvertebrate, and zooplankton
communities to fish introductions. In doing so, we believe
we have satisfied many of the criteria set forth
by Connell and Sousa (1983) as necessary to demonstrate
system stability. Our study was based on data
collected at least 30 yr after fish introductions took
place and given the short generation times of zooplankton
and benthic macroinvertebrates (generally one year
or less) this time frame would have allowed many complete
turnovers of these communities. We evaluated
recovery of these faunal assemblages over a similarly
long time frame. In addition, our study utilized dozens
of replicate lakes and demonstrated that, with some
minor exceptions, the response of these systems to a
perturbation and to the removal of the perturbation was
highly predictable.
Our snapshot approach provided a greater spatial and
temporal perspective of the resistance and resilience of
lake fauna than any previous study, but our approach
also had several limitations. First, our study was observational
in nature and therefore did not allow us to
unambiguously determine cause and effect. Such a determination
would only be possible with a replicated
whole-lake design, such as the one we are currently
using to assess recovery of lake ecosystems after the
experimental removal of exotic trout (R. Knapp and O.
Sarnelle, unpublished data). Second, because our
‘‘treatments’’ were constructed from lakes with different
fish stocking histories (never-stocked, stocked-fishpresent,
and stocked-now-fishless) instead of from
lakes that had treatments randomly assigned to them,
our study design confounded effects due to fish and
those due to habitat differences between lake categories.
The fact that correcting for habitat influences had
little effect on the ordination results suggests that the
observed differences in faunal assemblages between
lake categories were largely the result of fish stocking
history and not habitat effects. A third shortcoming of
our approach is that one-time sampling may only poorly
characterize benthic macroinvertebrate and zooplankton
presence/absence and abundance due to the
high seasonal and interannual variability of many taxa
(Arnott et al. 1998, 1999). In the alpine lakes that were
the focus of our study, the summer growing season is
short, allowing only a single generation for many taxa.
Perhaps as a result, invertebrate species composition
and richness changes little over the course of the summer
(Stoddard 1987, Engle and Melack 1995; R. Knapp
and O. Sarnelle, unpublished data). Our sampling undoubtedly
failed to document the presence of some rare
taxa, but inclusion of these rare taxa as a result of a
more intensive sampling regime would likely have had
little effect on the results due to their relative unimportance
in describing community structure. Abundances
of some species characteristic of our study lakes
do fluctuate markedly over the course of a single summer
(e.g., rotifers; R. Knapp and O. Sarnelle, unpublished
data). Although these fluctuations make it impossible
to precisely quantify species abundance from
a single sample, these inaccuracies are a source of
noise, not bias, and should therefore not have unduly
influenced our results. The fact that correction of
NMMDS scores for sampling date (and habitat variables)
did not alter the ordination results further suggests
that snapshot sampling was sufficient to describe
resistance and resilience of the invertebrate communities.
A final weakness of our study is that we were
only able to estimate resilience by comparison of the
frequency and abundance of taxa between stockednow-
fishless and never-stocked lakes. While this comparison
should provide a reasonable approximation
given our relatively large sample sizes, the strength of
our inferences as to whether a taxon had recovered or
not was considerably lower than what could be
achieved by following faunal changes after fish disappearance
in multiple lakes whose past community
structure was known. To increase the strength of our
inferences, we are currently combining our snapshot
approach with paleoecological analyses (Knapp et al.
2001) to determine more accurately how often the large
zooplankton species, H. shoshone and D. middendorffiana,
fail to recolonize and what the consequences of
such failures are for zooplankton community structure.
Indeed, preliminary results from these finer scale analyses
indicate that H. shoshone fails to reestablish in
;10% of lakes following fish disappearance.
Our finding that the fauna included in this study generally
have high resilience after fish disappearance has
important implications for restoration of these alpine
lake ecosystems. The majority of high mountain lakes
in the Sierra Nevada are located within national parks
and national forest wilderness areas, areas set aside in
part to protect natural processes. However, the introduction
of trout into these naturally fishless habitats
has dramatically altered these systems, and there is
increasing interest in returning some lakes to a fishless
condition (Knapp and Matthews 1998). The National
Park Service has already initiated such a program by
ending fish stocking on many of the lands under its
jurisdiction. In the Kings Canyon National Park portion
of our study area, all fish stocking was halted in 1977,
and many of our stocked-now-fishless lakes are the
result of this policy change. The results of our study
indicate that this policy change has accomplished its
goal of allowing the fauna of these lakes to recover
their predisturbance configurations, and argue for more
intensive fish removal efforts not only in the national
parks, but also in national forest wilderness areas,
where upwards of 80% of larger lakes still contain
introduced trout populations (Bahls 1992, Knapp and
Matthews 2000). Given the declining status of the
mountain yellow-legged frog and the likely decline in
zooplankton egg bank viability with increasing duration
of trout occupation, we suggest that any delay in
undertaking these restoration activities may further reduce
the chances that the target aquatic communities
will fully recover.