xabstract
We offer a case study showing: a) the susceptibility of the Truckee River and Lake Tahoe to an invasion by the New Zealand mudsnail
(Potamopyrgus antipodarum) and b) the short-term impacts on periphyton standing crop in the Truckee River and Lake Tahoe as a result of
grazing by New Zealand mudsnails. Snail survivorship in the Truckee River experiment ranged from 50–85 percent across treatments and
snail survivorship ranged from 5–40 percent in the Lake Tahoe experiment. Periphyton standing crop was negatively affected in both snail
density treatments of the Truckee River experiment but the results were mixed in the Lake Tahoe experiment. Our results suggest that the
Truckee River is more vulnerable to establishment by New Zealand mudsnails than Lake Tahoe.

xintroduction
In the Western United States ecosystem
managers have turned their attention to a
relatively new invader, the New Zealand
mudsnail, Potamopyrgus antipodarum (Gray,
1843). Once established, P. antipodarum can
rapidly spread through aquatic ecosystems. High
growth rates and the ability of individuals to
survive for up to three weeks out of water
contribute to the species’ ability to expand its
range (Winterbourn 1970). P. antipodarum is a
small snail (5 mm or less) that can establish in
high densities of up to 800,000/m2, causing a
number of deleterious impacts (Kerans et al.
2005). The snails can compete with native
invertebrates for algae, thus decreasing native
macroinvertebrate biodiversity and biomass
(Zaranko et al. 1997; Kerans et al. 2005).
P. antipodarum do not represent a profitable
food source for fish because their shells can
resist digestion (Bowler 1991). The poor food
quality of P. antipodarum and decrease in native
invertebrate populations can negatively impact
fish growth rates (Vinson and Baker 2008).
Lake Tahoe and the Truckee River are two
interconnected aquatic ecosystems located in the
western United States on the border of California
and Nevada. Lake Tahoe is an oligotrophic,
subalpine lake in the Sierra Nevada Mountains;
it is the second deepest lake in the United States
(USGS Lake Tahoe Data Clearinghouse 2008).
The Truckee River is Lake Tahoe’s only surface
outflow, flowing northeast through Reno,
Nevada and into the terminal Pyramid Lake.
Potamopyrgus antipodarum have not invaded
Lake Tahoe or the Truckee River, but
populations have become established in other
proximate locations such as the Owens River,
American River, Calaveras River, Mokelumne
River, Colorado River, Putah Creek, Lake Mead,
and Lake Shasta (Montana State University
2011). Given the potential for boats bringing P.
antipodarum from infested waters to either Lake
Tahoe or the Truckee River, our study had two
objectives: 1) to assess the likelihood of short
term survival and changes in snail biomass, and
2) to quantify the potential impacts of an
invasion by P. antipodarum on periphyton
standing crop and community composition.
Regional land managers were interested in a fast
assessment of invasion potential to assist with
prioritizing management of potential aquatic
invaders, so it was determined that a short term,
low resolution, predictive experiment would be
of management value.

xmethods
We conducted semi-natural laboratory
experiments to determine the survivability of
Potamopyrgus antipodarum, and its potential
impacts on periphyton in the Truckee River and
Lake Tahoe. Rocks with naturally occurring
periphyton were placed into 75 L aquaria filled
with approximately 60 L of water from each
ecosystem. Each aquarium had a bottom surface
measuring 30 × 60 cm. Twenty L of fresh water
was brought in from the respective system every
three days to diminish container and nutrient
depletion effects. Two 1000 W Eye Hortilux
Metal Halide grow lamps were placed above the
aquaria and set to 12 h cycles to mimic natural
light regimes. Environmental conditions (e.g.
water temperature, dissolved oxygen,
conductivity) in each aquarium were monitored
every 12 hours for the 14 d duration of the
experiments.
Rock substrate with periphyton was collected
from the Truckee River at Idlewild Park, in
Reno, Nevada and from Carnelian Bay on the
North Shore of Lake Tahoe, California in spring
2006. These locations were chosen due to their
accessibility and their popularity with the public
for recreational fishing, swimming, and boating.
The size of the individual rocks varied from 8 to
60 cm3 and all of the aquaria were filled with a
single layer of periphyton-covered rocks; the
tops of the all the rocks were at least 10 cm
below the surface of the water.
Snails used in the experiments were collected
in Putah Creek, California. This creek forms the
outflow of Lake Berryessa and is located in the
Coastal Range between Sacramento and the San
Francisco Bay Area. Over six percent of the
boats that come to Lake Tahoe have been in
Lake Berryessa in the previous seven days
(Wittman 2008). Therefore, it is plausible that
this particular population of snails could be
transported and introduced to either Lake Tahoe
or the Truckee River. After the snails were
collected they were placed into an aquarium with
water from Putah Creek. To insure that all snails
were alive initially, only snails that were moving
up the sides of the aquarium were placed in petri
dishes for sub-sampling and use in the
experiments.
The Truckee River experiment had a lowdensity
treatment (LD; 2 replicates, 140
snails/m2), a high-density treatment (HD; 2
replicates, 7400 snails/m2), and a control (C; 4
replicates, no snails). The control allowed us to
test whether the snails had a quantifiable effect
on periphyton growth. Density measurements
refer to the number of snails divided by the area
of the aquaria bottom (1800 cm2), not the area of
rock substrate. The Lake Tahoe experiment had
C, LD and HD treatments of similar densities to
the Truckee River experiment, but each
treatment (including C) had 2 replicates. We
used relatively low snail densities to avoid the
negative effects that competition for food
resources would have on survival rates.
Samples of periphyton were collected from
rocks before and after the experiment (n = 6 for
each replicate, so n = 36 for Tahoe, and n = 48
for Truckee) by scraping a specified area
(Truckee = 3 cm2, Tahoe = 5 cm2). The area
scraped for the Tahoe experiment was larger
because of lower periphyton standing crop.
Samples prepared for chlorophyll-a analysis
were frozen at -20 °C. Chlorophyll-a extraction
was performed using a hot methanol procedure
and analyzed with a spectrophotometer to
determine periphyton standing crop (Eloranta
1983, Iwamura et al. 1970). Enumeration and
identification of algae (genus level) was
accomplished using differential interference
contrast microscopy on an Olympus BX-60
(Olympus America Inc.) that was outfitted with
epifluorescence capabilities. A minimum of 400
natural unit counts (cells, colonies, or filaments)
were identified. The minimum count was
accomplished from random fields along transects
on three slides. Medium size taxa (50 μm to 200
μm) were counted at 200× (10 fields) and large
taxa (> 200 μm) were enumerated at 100×
(whole slide). All counts were standardized to
the cobble area (cm2). One milliliter of subsample
was acid washed (nitric acid 50% v/v)
and fixed in a diatom mounting media for
viewing at 1000× to confirm the identity of
diatom genera. Algal growth forms were
identified using Kutka and Richards (1996)
metrics that were modified from Molloy (1992).
Sub-samples of the water used in the
experiments were obtained for nutrient analysis
every time fresh water was collected (n = 5 for
the Truckee River experiment, n = 6 for Lake
Tahoe). Nitrate, ammonium, soluble reactive
phosphorus, dissolved phosphorus, and total
phosphorus were analyzed using standard
methods (Clesceri et al. 2005; Solórzano 1969).
Calcium levels were measured by mixing 20 ml
of water from each of the sub-samples into two
samples (one for the Truckee River and one for
Lake Tahoe). These two samples were analyzed
in accordance with EPA procedures (United
States Environmental Protection Agency 1993).
The snails used to determine pre-treatment
mean snail weight were collected from the
populations used in the experiments by randomly
selecting snails from petri dishes full of live
snails. Snails removed from the petri dish were
dried and weighed. Snails that remained in the
petri dish were used in the experiments. These
sub-samples, collected before and after
termination of the experiment, were dried at
90ºC for 24 hours and individually weighed to
determine mean snail weight using n = 150 snails
for all pre-treatment (PT) weights, n = 200 for
Truckee River HD post-treatment weights, and
all surviving snails for the remaining treatment
weights. To determine survivorship at the end of
the experiment all snails in the aquaria were
counted and placed into a smaller aquarium with
fresh water from the respective system. A square
was drawn on the bottom of the aquarium and
the snails were given 48 h to move out of that
square. Snails that showed no signs of movement
after 48 hours were considered dead.
Survivorship was determined by dividing the
number of snails alive at the end of the
experiment by the number of snails alive at the
beginning. Growth rates are presented as percent
of initial mean snail weight per day, calculated
by dividing milligrams of growth per day in each
treatment by the initial mean snail weight.
Statistical tests were performed on mean snail
weight and chlorophyll-a data that had been
tested for equal variances by performing a Oneway
ANOVA on the squared residuals and for
normality using the Ryan-Joiner test (similar to
Shapiro-Wilk). Multiple comparison tests
(Tukey’s Honestly Significant Differences) were
used in conjunction with One-way ANOVAs to
determine which data sets were significantly
different from each other. Where data were
normal but variances were found to be unequal a
weighted ANOVA was used (Ott and
Longnecker 2010). Mean snail weight data were
normalized with a square root transformation.
Pre-treatment mean snail weights were compared
between the two experiments using an ANOVA.
Chi-squared tests were used to assess the
significance of differences in survivorship
between treatments. All statistical analyses were
performed using Minitab 16 (Minitab Inc., State
College, PA). Graphs were created using
GraphPad Prism version 4.03 (GraphPad
Software, La Jolla, CA).

xresults
Environmental conditions in the aquaria stayed
moderately constant throughout the 14 days in
both experiments (Table 1). Temperature, dissolved
oxygen, and conductivity in the aquaria
were similar to conditions in the field (USGS
2011a, Kolosovich personal observation). Water
collected from the Truckee River (February,
2006) had higher nutrient levels than the water
collected from Lake Tahoe (May, 2006).
Ammonium, total phosphorus, and soluble
reactive phosphorus concentrations in the waters
of the two systems were all relatively similar
(Table 1). Dissolved calcium (approximately 9–
10 mg/L) did not seem to impact survival in the
short-term. Water from the Truckee River did
have slightly higher calcium concentrations
(Table 1), but P. antipodarum are often found in
waters with both high and low calcium content
(Winterbourn 1970). Furthermore, Lodge et al.
(1987) stated that when calcium concentrations
are above 5 mg/L the success of snail
establishment was governed by other factors,
including food selectivity.
In both experiments snail survival rates were
higher in LD than HD treatments and
survivorship was significantly different between
the HD treatments in the two locations (Chi
square p<0.001) and between the LD treatments
(p<0.001). The difference in snail survival rates
between LD and HD treatments were significant
in both the Truckee River (Chi square p=0.016)
and the Lake Tahoe experiments (p<0.001, Table
2). Mean snail weights were not compared
among locations because the snails used in the
two experiments were collected from the same
population but at different times and because the
pre-treatment mean snail weights were different
for the two experiments (ANOVA p<0.001,
Figure 1). In the Truckee River experiment the
PT, LD, and HD mean snail weights were found
to be significantly different (ANOVA p<0.001)
and the Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference
test showed that the PT mean snail weight
differed from the LD and HD mean snail
weights, but the LD and HD mean snail weights
were not significantly different from each other
(Figure 1). The mean snail weights in the Lake
Tahoe experiment were found to be normally
distributed but had unequal variances so a
weighted ANOVA was used to determine
significance and none of the differences were
found to be statistically significant (p=0.098).
When snail weights are converted to growth rates
(as percent of initial biomass per day) then the
LD treatments in both the Truckee River and the
Lake Tahoe experiments behaved very similarly
(1.746 and 1.741 respectively). In the Truckee
River HD treatment the snails grew by 3.468
percent of initial biomass per day and the snails
in the Lake Tahoe HD treatment exhibited
negative growth, losing 0.641 percent of their
initial biomass per day (Table 2).
A One-way ANOVA shows that the
concentrations of chlorophyll-a in both LD and
HD treatments and the control of the Lake Tahoe
experiment were significantly different (ANOVA
p=0.001). The Tukey’s Honestly Significant
Difference test showed that the HD treatment
differed significantly from the LD and the C, but
the LD and the C were not significantly
different. In the Truckee River experiment
chlorophyll-a concentrations were found to be
normally distributed, but the variances were not
equal so a weighted ANOVA was used. The
results indicate that none of the differences were
statistically significant (ANOVA p=0.836,
Figure 2).
In the Truckee River experiment a total of 18
diatom genera and one chlorophyte (Stigeoclonium)
were identified. The assemblages were
consistently similar (>70 %) among PT, C, LD,
and HD treatments. The highly motile diatom,
Nitzschia, was particularly abundant as well as
the erect diatom Diatoma. In the Lake Tahoe
experiment, 24 diatom genera, one cyanophyte
(Oscillatoria), and two chlorophytes
(Stigeoclonium and Cosmarium) were identified.
These diatom-dominated assemblages were also
consistently similar (>80% similarity) among
PT, C, LD, and HD treatments. The araphid
diatoms, Synedra and Fragilaria, dominated the
Tahoe assemblages, thus inflating the relative
abundance of erect growth forms. The primary
substrate for these abundant erect taxa appeared
to be excessive stalks (extracellular polymeric
substances) produced by the diatoms,
Gomphonema and Gomphoneis. These stalks did
appear to decrease in the HD treatments. Stalks
were also present in the Truckee biofilms,
though not as excessive as in the Lake Tahoe
experiment.

xdiscussion
Our results suggest that the Truckee River may
be more susceptible than Lake Tahoe to an
invasion by Potamopyrgus antipodarum. In the
Truckee River experiment, snails had higher
growth rates in the HD treatment than the LD
treatment; however, survival rates were higher in
the LD treatment (Table 2, Figure 1). The results
of the ANOVA showed that mean snail weights
in both LD and HD treatments were significantly
different from the PT weight. This indicates that
the snails did grow in both Truckee River
treatments but the higher post-treatment mean
snail weight in the HD treatment was not
significantly different from the LD treatment.
Generally >50 % of snails survived and grew at
both densities in Truckee River water,
suggesting the potential to persist in this
environment.
The Lake Tahoe experiment suggested low to
moderate survival rates in that environment, with
a decline in mean snail weight during the
experiment timeframe in the HD treatment
(Table 2). At the low density of 140 snails/m2,
snails survived and grew. However, at the higher
density of 7400 snails/m2, survivorship was very
low (6%), and growth over 14 days was negative,
suggesting difficulty in persisting in the Lake
Tahoe environment at this density. In the Lake
Tahoe experiment, periphyton in the HD
treatment was grazed to such low levels that food
availability may have been the main factor
limiting survivorship and growth (Figure 2).
Lake Tahoe is an oligotrophic ecosystem and
periphyton productivity may not sustain high
densities of P. antipodarum. It is possible that in
the Lake Tahoe HD treatment, periphyton
became so sparse and resource competition so
high, that grazing became an activity in which
the snails exhibited a net loss of energy.
Snails tend to be effective grazers that can
control algal biomass and community structure.
The current work shows strong evidence of topdown
effects on periphyton standing crop;
however, there was no indication that the
community structure was affected. Previous
research suggested that physiognomy may not
always be a good predictor of the susceptibility
of different algae to grazing (Wellnitz and Ward
1998). Similarly, Villanueva et al. (2004) found
little change in the periphyton community
composition due to grazing by another snail,
Chilina dombeiana (Bruguiere, 1789). However,
the duration of the current study may not have
been enough time to result in a change in
community structure due to grazing. Some
studies did not see a divergence in similarity
between their grazing treatments until after day
16 (Lamberti et al. 1987; Steinman et al. 1992).
The excessive amounts of stalk material in the
Tahoe periphyton likely increased the carbon
content of the biofilm grazed by snails, thereby
increasing the carbon relative to nitrogen and
phosphorus. Thus, the potential stoichiometric
imbalance of Tahoe periphyton may have
impaired survivability by providing poorer food
quality compared to the Truckee River
periphyton (Sterner and Elser 2002).
After 14 days the systems might not have
reached equilibrium and, given more time, snails
in the Truckee River HD treatment could have
experienced a population crash as well. Ideally,
the experiment would have occurred over more
than 14 days, but the need for immediate
information to assist with ongoing management
decisions as well as funding limitations
necessitated the short duration of the
experiments. In fact, results from this, as well as
other studies in the region, led to the
establishment of new guidelines for boat
permitting and inspection at Lake Tahoe to
proactively reduce the likelihood of nuisance
aquatic species introductions (TRPA 2010;
USACE 2009). As of June 2011 P. antipodarum
have not been found to be in Lake Tahoe nor the
Truckee River (Montana State University 2011;
USGS 2011b).
Potamopyrgus antipodarum has a strong
ability for widespread colonization because of its
environmental adaptability including tolerance of
broad thermal ranges, osmotic concentrations,
flow, disturbance regimes, and substrates
(Winterbourn 1970; Hylleberg and Siegismund
1987; Quinn et al. 1994; Schrieber et al. 2003;
New Zealand Mudsnail Management and Control
Working Group 2006; Butkus et al. 2012; Moffit
and James 2012). The most effective way to
minimize impacts is to prevent or slow snail
introductions to new ecosystems. Since invasion
vectors can include boats or other personal
equipment (fishing gear, boots, etc), and the
success of this species is a function of the clone
present and local environmental conditions,
ecosystem-specific experiments are important for
determining survivability and the potential of
P. antipodarum to successfully invade specific
waterways. We offer a case study showing that
the short–term survival of adult snails is possible
in the nutrient poor ecosystems of the Western
United States. Given that over 50% of the snails
survived and exhibited measurable growth in
both snail density treatments of the Truckee
River experiment, our results indicate that if
these snails are transported to the Truckee River,
they will be able to prosper in high densities.
The Truckee River is a popular fishing
destination for the residents of Reno, NV,
especially because it flows through the center of
town. It is also connected to other lakes that are
popular among fishermen (e.g. Virginia Lake,
Pyramid Lake, and Washoe Lake). Local, state,
and Native American tribal agencies should be
proactive in investigating survival and growth
potentials of invasive species in western
waterways. Such information would aid in
predicting potential outcomes of species
invasions and could be used to prioritize what
species and ecosystems should be of primary
concern.