xabstract
Like other fl oating-leaved plants, dense beds of water-chestnut (Trapa natans) may cause the underlying
water to become hypoxic or even anoxic. Despite this potential stress, previous studies have reported dense and
diverse invertebrate communities in water-chestnut beds. However, none of these previous studies simultaneously
measured dissolved oxygen concentrations and invertebrate communities, leaving open the possibility that these
study sites were not severely hypoxic. Here, we report the results of a study in which we measured both invertebrates
and dissolved oxygen in a large, dense water-chestnut bed in the freshwater tidal Hudson River, New York.
We sampled invertebrates at nine sites in the bed using a modifi ed Downing box-sampler and a corer. We took
samples both early in the growing season (June), when the water-chestnut canopy was not fully developed and hypoxia
was only moderate, and in the middle of the growing season (July), when the canopy was fully developed and
hypoxia was frequent and severe. We hypothesized that the effects of hypoxia would be more severe in July than in
June, in the interior of the bed than near its edge, and for sediment-dwelling animals than for epiphytic animals. We
also hypothesized that predatory invertebrates would be especially abundant in the most hypoxic sites, where fi sh
predation presumably would be reduced. None of these hypotheses was supported. Instead, we found that all locations
and microhabitats that we studied supported dense, diverse communities of invertebrates, including insects,
oligochaetes, crustaceans, and other taxa. The mechanisms by which these animals tolerate short-term hypoxia
need to be elucidated. We suggest that water-chestnut beds in the Hudson are valuable habitats for invertebrate
biodiversity and production, and may contribute substantially to fi sh production.

xintroduction
Macrophytes generally are considered to improve
habitat quality for aquatic invertebrates by increasing
food availability, surfaces for attachment, and shelter
from predators. Many studies (e.g., Schramm & Jirka
1989, Kornijów et al. 1990, Strayer & Malcom 2007)
have shown that invertebrate communities are denser
and more diverse in macrophyte beds than in nearby
unvegetated habitats. However, dense beds of fl oating-
leaved macrophytes may produce conditions that
are stressful for invertebrates by creating hypoxia or
even anoxia beneath their canopies (Caraco & Cole
2002, Caraco et al. 2006). Perhaps the best-known of
these plants is water-chestnut (Trapa natans), a Eurasian
plant that was introduced into North America
as an ornamental plant, and which now forms beds
as large as hundreds of hectares (Nieder et al. 2004)
that may become completely anoxic (Caraco & Cole
2002).
The invertebrate communities of these hypoxiainducing
plants are not well understood. Although the
dense physical structure and high primary production
in these plant beds should favor dense and diverse
invertebrate communities, the low oxygen concentrations
should exclude many invertebrate species,
leading to communities that are low in species richness
if not density. Dissolved oxygen concentrations
< 2–4 mg/L are widely considered to be limiting to
aquatic invertebrates and other animals (e.g., USEPA
1986, 2000), and often are reached in such dense plant
beds (e.g., Goodwin et al. 2008). Invertebrate communities
in such hypoxic environments often are dominated
by species that are tolerant to low oxygen (e.g.,
some tubifi cid oligochaetes and nematodes), or which
possess special physiological, morphological, or behavioral
adaptations such as hemoglobin (e.g., some
cladocerans and chironomid midges), plastrons (some
insects), or other use of atmospheric oxygen (e.g., pulmonate
snails and some insects).
The few studies that have been done on invertebrates
in dense beds of fl oating-leaved macrophytes
have been inconclusive. Some reported relatively low
density of invertebrates (Efi tre et al. 2001, Feldman
2001), but others found as many (Cattaneo et al. 1998)
or more (Masifwa et al. 2001, Strayer et al. 2003) invertebrates
in water-chestnut beds than in other nearby
habitats. However, none of these previous studies
measured oxygen dynamics in the beds that were studied.
Because the degree of hypoxia induced by these
plants varies widely depending on the thickness of the
canopy, intensity of water exchange, and area of the
bed (Hummel & Findlay 2006), it is diffi cult to know
the extent to which differences among studies might
simply be a result of differences in oxygen stress
among the beds.
Here, we describe the invertebrate communities of
a large water-chestnut bed in which we simultaneously
measured oxygen dynamics. We sampled invertebrate
communities both before the plant canopy had fully
developed, when oxygen stress should have been low,
and after the canopy was well developed and hypoxia
had set in. We also sampled several locations in the
bed, both near its edge and deep in the interior of the
bed, as well as different microhabitats within the bed:
the sediments, the fl oating leaves, and the submerged
leaves. Our hypotheses were (1) species richness,
species diversity, and total density should follow the
pattern of oxygenation in all three microhabitats and
therefore be lower in the interior of the bed than at its
edge; (2) the strength of this spatial patterning would
be more clearly marked at the peak of plant biomass
in July than in June before the canopy was fully developed;
(3) the most susceptible animal communities to
oxygen defi ciency would be the zoobenthos, and the
least the epiphytic fauna leaving on the fl oating leaves,
which has access to the atmosphere; and (4) because
the interior, less oxygenated areas of the bed might
serve as refuge for invertebrates against fi sh predation,
these areas should have a higher percentage of invertebrate
predators than edge habitats.

xmethods
The study site was a large (120 ha), dense, and nearly monospecifi
c bed of water-chestnut in Imbocht Bay, along the west bank
of the Hudson River at river kilometer 172 (42o 10′ N, 73o 54′ W)
(Caraco & Cole 2002). The water at this site is entirely fresh,
although the average tidal range is 1.2 m. The depth in the study
area at low tide ranged from 0.3 to 1.5 m, and the bottom sediments
consisted of soft sand and mud. At nearby Trapa beds,
sediments were ~44 % sand, 43 % silt, and 14 % clay (Strayer
et al. 2003).
We sampled along the south edge of this bed, where a small
channel allowed access to the interior of the bed (Fig. 1). We
sampled along three transects marked by buoys: outer – near
the river channel, at a distance of ca. 230 m from the edge of the
Trapa bed; middle – in the central part of the bed; and inner –
close to the river bank. These transects were separated by a distance
of ca. 200 m, and were~15 m long. We took samples from
a boat that was pulled along an anchored line at three sampling
sites along each transect, at ~7 m intervals.
We collected invertebrate samples during low tide on 21
June 2005 (mid-morning), the beginning of the development of
Trapa bed, and on 27 July (mid-afternoon), when the stand was
fully developed. Epiphytic animals were collected with a modifi
ed Downing sampler (Downing 1986) of 30 × 21 × 10 cm. We
modifi ed the sampler by making 20 × 12 cm slots in both sides,
and covering them with 280-μm mesh Nitex screen to prevent
back-pressure while closing the sampler. Samples were taken
separately from the rosettes of fl oating leaves and from the underwater
stems with their feather-like leaves. Benthic samples
were collected beneath the water-chestnut by means of an acrylic
tube, 6 cm in diameter, closed by a rubber stopper. Material
collected was then sieved through a 280-μm mesh screen.
Both plant and sediment samples were transferred to plastic
bags and kept in a cooler. In the lab, samples were refrigerated
for no more than fi ve days and processed by rinsing plants under
fl owing tap water onto a 280-μm mesh screen, while sliding our
fi ngers over the plant surfaces. Then we checked the plants for
animals after placing the material on white trays fi lled with water.
The same trays were used for picking benthic invertebrates
from the sediment samples. We preserved collected animals with
70 % ethanol.
The wet weight of each plant sample was determined to
calculate invertebrate density per g WW (wet weight) of plant.
Knowing the actual biomass of the vegetation in the fi eld
(Goodwin et al. 2008), we also calculated densities of epiphytic
invertebrates per area of river bottom by multiplying the density
of invertebrates per gram of plant by the measured plant
biomass.
At each sampling date, we measured the water temperature
and oxygen by means of YSI meter at the water surface and near
the bottom. In addition, dissolved oxygen concentrations were
automatically recorded every 15 min by YSI Endeco sondes
(UPG 6000) at the outer and inner transects, from the end of
May until the end of July (for details see Goodwin et al. 2008).
Invertebrates from both the water-chestnut and from the
sediment samples were identifi ed to the lowest taxonomic rank
possible (Wiederholm 1983, Peckarsky et al. 1990, Kathman &
Brinkhurst 1998, Epler 2001). We classifi ed the taxa as predators
using Armitage et al. (1995) and Bass & Potts (2001).
Statistical analyses
Differences in invertebrate population densities among months,
transects, and positions were tested with a repeated-measures
ANOVA. Population densities were transformed by log10(x+1)
before statistical analysis. We used non-metric multidimension-
al scaling (NMS) to ordinate the invertebrate samples, using
PC-ORD in autopilot mode after eliminating species found in
< 3 samples (McCune & Grace 2002). We used Multi-Response
Permutation Procedures (MRPP, McCune & Grace 2002) to test
for differences among groups in the ordinations.

xresults
The mean biomass of water-chestnut in Outer, Middle
and Inner transects, respectively, was 22, 53, and 57 g
DW/m2 in June, and 348, 482, and 423 g DW/m2 in
July. The temperature varied little among the sampling
sites, from 25.8 to 29.2 °C in June, when the surface
water was more exposed to solar radiation, and from
26.0 to 26.3 °C in July, when a dense carpet of vegetation
covered the water. Dissolved oxygen concentrations
varied strongly with the tidal cycle (Fig. 2),
and fl uctuated more widely in July, when the waterchestnut
canopy was fully developed, than in June. In
June, oxygen concentrations never fell below 2.5 mg/L
in the week prior to invertebrate sampling, but fell below
2 mg/L during most ebb tides in July, and reached
values as low as 1.0 mg/L.
We found 50 macroinvertebrate taxa in our samples
(Table 1). Species richness was higher in the sediments
(30 taxa) than on the stems (28 taxa) or fl oating
leaves (20 taxa). Contrary to our expectations, we
found higher number of taxa in July (48 taxa) than in
June (28 taxa), and there were only small differences
in richness among transects (Fig. 3).
Density of macroinvertebrates also was much higher
in July (12,850/m2) than June (1671/m2). Animal
density in all three microhabitats varied signifi cantly
between months (Table 2). Density on fl oating leaves
and in sediments did not vary signifi cantly with location
in the Trapa bed or show a location*time interaction.
ANOVA of animal density on stems showed
some effects of sampling transect (p = 0.11) and
transect * month (p = 0.002), but these effects (Fig. 4)
differed from our hypotheses about how sampling location
would affect animal density (i.e., lower densities
in inner transects than outer, and spatial patterns
stronger in July than in June).
Community structure of benthic and epiphytic
macroinvertebrates was related chiefl y to microhabitat
(fl oating leaves vs. stems vs. sediments) and month
(Figs 5, 6). The ordination of all samples showed a
clear separation of three groups (p < 0.001, MRPP) –
all benthic samples (within which there was a subdivision
between the June and July samples), all epiphytic
samples (i.e., stem plus leaf samples) in June, and all
epiphytic samples in July. The stem and leaf samples
were somewhat distinct from one another in June, but
not at all in July. When samples from each habitat
(sediment, stem, and leaf) were ordinated separately,
they showed a clear separation between June and July
samples (p < 0.01 in all three cases, MRPP). The ordination
of leaf samples produced just one axis, which
was made up entirely of the difference between June
samples (with an ordination score of +1) and July samples
(with an ordination score of –1). The June stem
samples showed some distinction among the three
transects, but such a distinction was reduced in July,
and was never evident in the sediment samples. In general,
ordinations did not show any clear relationships
between sampling location and community structure.
Instead, community composition appeared to depend
chiefl y on month and microhabitat. There were hints
that transect position might matter (in the stem sam-
ples), but its infl uence was clearly secondary to those
of microhabitat and season.

xdiscussion
The water-chestnut bed supported a rich community
of benthic and epiphytic macroinvertebrates, despite
the common occurrence of hypoxia. Neither the density,
richness, taxonomic composition, nor the functional-
group composition (i.e., predator densities) of
the invertebrate community would suggest that the
water-chestnut bed was stressful to invertebrates. The
dominant species were not those with known physiological
or behavioral mechanisms to tolerate low oxygen.
Instead, the water-chestnut bed supported a fauna
dominated by chironomids, other insects, oligochaetes,
and crustaceans, which is similar to those found
in well oxygenated parts of the Hudson and other large
rivers (Strayer & Smith 2001).
Our specifi c hypotheses were not supported. We
did not fi nd that species richness or density was lower
in the interior of the bed than at its edge, and there was
no indication that spatial patterning in these variables
was stronger in July than in June. When we looked
at invertebrate communities in different microhabitats,
we did not fi nd that the sediment-dwelling animals
were any more affected by season or sampling position
than animals that lived on water-chestnut stems
or fl oating leaves. Finally, although we did not have
any direct information on use of the Trapa bed by fi sh,
we did not fi nd that interior areas of the bed contained
more invertebrate predators than edge areas.
Our results are diffi cult to explain because simultaneous
measurements of dissolved oxygen concentrations
showed that the site that we studied was subject
to frequent hypoxia, especially in July, when we found
animal communities to be densest and most diverse.
Thus, we cannot explain away our results by suggesting
that our study site was one of those small or well
fl ushed Trapa beds in which oxygen is not seriously
depleted (Hummel & Findlay 2006).
Instead, we suggest that the animals living in the
Trapa bed must possess one or more behavioral and
physiological mechanisms that allow them to tolerate
at least short-term hypoxia. There are a number
of possible mechanisms, including use of respiratory
pigments such as hemoglobin (as occurs in some
cladocerans and chironomid midges; Int Panis et al.
1996, Strayer et al. 2003); use of atmospheric oxygen
via lungs or plastrons (as occurs in many pulmonate
snails and some insects; e.g., McMahon 1983, Williams
& Feltmate 1992); movement to the relatively
well oxygenated near-surface layer of the water column
to use “aquatic surface respiration” (as has been
shown to occur in various fi shes and motile invertebrates;
Tinson & Laybourn-Parry 1985, Kornijów &
Moss 2002, Stierhoff et al. 2003); or accumulation of
a short-term oxygen debt during the hypoxic periods
that is redeemed when oxygen concentrations rise during
the fl ood tide a few hours later (e.g., production of
organic acids that are later metabolized, as occurs in
many kinds of invertebrates – McMahon 1983, Hamburger
et al. 2000). The extent to which the various
species in Trapa beds use these or other mechanisms is
not known at present. As we have discussed previously
(Strayer et al. 2003), the dominant taxa in water-chestnut
beds do not easily fall into any of these classes of
invertebrates – most of the chironomids that we collected
do not possess hemoglobin, the oligochaetes are
dominated by the “naidids” rather than anoxia-tolerant
“tubifi cids” such as Tubifex, and many of the species
that we collected are not able to access atmospheric
oxygen or even the presumably well-oxygenated surface
layer.
Hypoxia or anoxia at our study site sometimes is
more severe than in 2005 (Goodwin et al. 2008), and
water-chestnut beds that are not fl ushed by tides or currents
may have more extended periods of anoxia than
we observed. Dense and diverse macroinvertebrate
communities might not be able to persist under more
severe conditions than we observed, so some dense,
anoxic macrophyte beds probably are poor habitats for
invertebrates.
Whatever the mechanisms that allow invertebrates
to tolerate the hypoxia of the Trapa beds, it appears
that these habitats are valuable habitats in the Hudson
River, supporting dense populations of invertebrates,
many species of which are rare in other habitats in the
river (Strayer et al. 2003). However, if hypoxia prevents
fi sh from freely using Trapa beds, there may be
a weak link in the food web between this rich invertebrate
production and fi sh. There are at least three
ways in which the invertebrates produced in Trapa
beds might contribute to fi sh production in the Hudson.
First, fi sh may enter the Trapa bed and feed there
on invertebrates. This must occur at least early in the
growing season, when hypoxia is still moderate. Coote
et al. (2001) found that many species of fi sh were in
the same water-chestnut bed that we studied as late
in the season as August and September, and that their
guts were fi lled with invertebrates from the bed (especially
chironomids). Second, invertebrates may drift
from the water-chestnut bed into adjoining, well ox
ygenated habitats where fi sh live. Third, Trapa is an
annual plant that disappears rapidly at the end of the
growing season in September and October (Findlay
et al. 1990). When this happens, the invertebrates it
harbored must become available to fi sh, whether they
stay in place in the newly denuded sediments or drift
to other habitats in the river. Thus, it appears likely
that Trapa beds might contribute substantially to fi sh
production, as well as invertebrate production and biodiversity,
in the Hudson, in spite of their hypoxia.