xabstract
Aim Environmental and biological characteristics interact in complex ways to
determine ecosystem susceptibility to invasive species, and a greater understanding
of their relative roles in invader spread and impact is needed. We
evaluated relationships between environmental characteristics, biodiversity of
indigenous species, and the abundance and ecological impact of an invasive
fish, round goby (Neogobius melanostomus).
Location Tributaries to Lake Michigan, WI, USA.
Methods We assessed the distribution and abundance of round gobies and
native fishes in tributaries via electrofishing. We compared fish community
composition and diversity in streams with (n = 30) and without (n = 52)
round gobies and examined how trends in round goby abundance from 2007
to 2010 correlated with changes in abundance of five native benthic fishes. We
used redundancy analysis to determine how indigenous stream communities
related to environmental characteristics and round goby abundance.
Results Round goby abundance was best explained by environmental
characteristics, with watershed area and temperature explaining 22.4% of the
variation. Species richness and Shannon diversity only explained 6.9% of the
variation in round goby abundance and only an additional 2.3% after considering
environmental characteristics. Round goby abundance was not a significant
predictor of fish community composition, which was best explained by seven
environmental variables (30.3% of the variation). Invaded communities had
significantly higher indigenous species richness than uninvaded communities
(8.38 vs. 6.54). Round goby abundance was low compared with estimates from
other studies, but showed an increasing trend in many tributaries (average
10.8-fold increase from 2007 to 2010). Surprisingly, there were no temporal
trends in native benthic fish abundance despite increases in round goby
abundance.
Main conclusions Environmental characteristics favouring high fish diversity
(e.g. resource availability and warm water temperature) were positively
associated with round goby abundance. However, round goby density and
impact are relatively low in most tributaries at present, emphasizing the importance
of considering heterogeneity in an invader’s abundance when assessing
invasion success.

xintroduction
Invasive species inflict huge economic and ecological costs
world-wide (Vitousek et al., 1996; Pimentel et al., 2005;
Lodge et al., 2006) in part by altering the composition of
communities and reducing ecosystem services (Chapin et al.,
2000). Understanding factors related to invader abundance
and impact remains an important goal in ecology (Parker
et al., 1999; Byers et al., 2002; Kulhanek et al., 2011). Ecological
niche models are often employed to assess ecosystem
susceptibility to invasion based on environmental conditions
(Peterson, 2003; Mercado-Silva et al., 2006; Kornis & Vander
Zanden, 2010). However, biotic factors such as community
composition and diversity can also play a role in susceptibility
to invasion. Theory predicts diverse and intact assemblages
of native species should be resistant to species
invasions at local scales (Elton, 1958); this is supported by
models (Case, 1990) and experimental studies (Tilman, 1997;
Stachowicz et al., 1999; Kennedy et al., 2002). At larger
scales, however, environmental factors related to high native
species diversity may facilitate species invasions (Levine,
2000; Hooper et al., 2005). Thus, invasion success, in terms
of invader establishment, spread and abundance, is likely
determined by a combination of environmental conditions,
resource availability and biotic community composition at
multiple spatial scales (Shea & Chesson, 2002).
Although invasive species commonly invade ecosystems
similar to their native habitat, species may act unpredictably
outside of their native range (Mooney & Cleland, 2001; Peterson
& Vieglais, 2001). Invasion of habitats dissimilar from
a species’ native range is not uncommon, complicating our
ability to predict ecosystem susceptibility (Urban et al., 2007;
Loo et al., 2007; Kornis & Vander Zanden, 2010). Invasive
species are often characterized by genetic plasticity, allowing
rapid adaptation to novel environments (Lee et al., 2003;
Lavergne & Molofsky, 2007; Prentis et al., 2008; Facon et al.,
2008). Broad physiological tolerance (Reid & Orlova, 2002)
and release from predators, competitors or parasites (Keane
& Crawley, 2002; Blumenthal, 2006) can also lead to invasion
of unexpected habitats. Ecological niche theory suggests that
species are not equally suited to multiple habitats; for invasive
species, lower density and impact would be expected in
suboptimal habitats (Yokomizo et al., 2009). Comparing a
single species’ invasion in multiple habitats could provide
valuable insight into the heterogeneity of invasion effects.
Round goby (Neogobius melanostomus) invasion of the
Laurentian Great Lakes provides a unique opportunity to
compare invasion of multiple ecosystem types. Native to the
Black and Caspian Seas, round gobies are associated with
numerous negative effects in the Laurentian Great Lakes
(Kornis et al., 2012), including local extirpations of native
fishes (Janssen & Jude, 2001; Lauer et al., 2004) and declines
in fish and invertebrate abundance (Balshine et al., 2005;
Lederer et al., 2008). Round gobies are becoming increasingly
common in Laurentian Great Lake tributaries (Kornis &
Vander Zanden, 2010; Poos et al., 2010) an unexpected
secondary invasion considering round gobies are largely a
lentic species (Charlebois et al., 1997; Harka & Bı´ro´ , 2007).
Few studies have examined round goby invasion success in
tributaries. Kornis & Vander Zanden (2010) found watershed
area and stream gradient to be the strongest predictors of
round goby presence/absence, Krakowiak & Pennuto (2008)
concluded stream size was a good predictor of presence, and
Baldwin et al. (2012) added that streams with low concentrations
of dissolved ions such as calcium resist invasion. Conflicting
evidence exists with regard to biotic factors: several
studies have suggested that round gobies tend to invade low
diversity streams (Carman et al., 2006; Krakowiak & Pennuto,
2008), but Poos et al. (2010) documented an invasion
of species diversity hot spots in Ontario tributaries. Thus,
the respective roles of abiotic and biotic factors in round
goby invasion success remain undetermined.
The ecological impacts of round gobies in Laurentian
Great Lake tributaries are also unclear. Potential impact on
tributary communities is large (Poos et al., 2010) but may
not translate into realized impact. Krakowiak & Pennuto
(2008) found significantly reduced invertebrate diversity in
four goby-invaded tributaries of Lake Erie compared with
four non-invaded streams. This study also suggested
decreased fish diversity in invaded systems, but this trend
proved statistically insignificant. Further comparison of biological
communities in streams invaded and not invaded by
round gobies is warranted because Krakowiak & Pennuto
(2008) only studied sites within 2–3 km of Lake Erie. Round
gobies have invaded farther upstream (> 10 km) in many
tributaries (Kornis & Vander Zanden, 2010), and upstream
sites often differ from downstream sites in terms of environmental
factors, habitat complexity and biological community
structure (Harrel et al., 1967; Gorman & Karr, 1978;
Vannote et al., 1980).
We pose two overarching questions in this study: (1) do
biological characteristics such as community diversity and
abundance affect round goby invasion success? and (2) are
invaded communities in turn affected by round goby
invasion? These intertwining issues are common in invasion
biology, as native communities can both affect and be
affected by an invader, and both issues can be addressed by
viewing the same data from different perspectives. We
address question one by describing the amount of variation
in round goby density explained by biotic and abiotic
factors. Question two is addressed by describing the
composition of stream fish communities in terms of their
relationship with round goby density and environmental
conditions, by comparing indigenous fish species densities in
invaded and uninvaded systems, and by evaluating changes
in the density of five indigenous benthic fishes at invaded
sites over time. We also compare fish community diversity
in streams with and without round gobies, with implications
for both questions. In this study, ‘non-native species’ refers
to species outside of their native range, while ‘invasive species’
refers to non-native species with documented negative
ecological effects. ‘Establishment’ will be used to describe a
species’ presence/absence, ‘spread’ a species’ range and
‘abundance’ a species’ density. ‘Invasion success’ encompasses
high degrees of establishment, spread and abundance.


xmethods
Site selection and fish collection
Sites used in this study (Fig. 1) represent a subset of sites
from a 2007 census of all Wisconsin tributaries of Lake
Michigan, with sampling designed to ascertain the distribution
of round gobies in these streams (Kornis & Vander Zanden,
2010). In the current study, we only evaluated wadeable
sites (< 1 m maximum depth) where the stream bottom was
visible (82 sites from 58 distinct streams). Sites were sampled
using a battery-powered backpack electrofishing unit with
pulsed DC current, the most widely used method in studies
of riverine fish communities (Zalewski, 1983). Sites from
Kornis & Vander Zanden (2010) that were too deep or turbid
to sample via electrofishing were excluded because they
were sampled using minnow traps, a sampling method with
considerable bias towards small benthic fishes and thus not
suitable for studies of fish communities. As physical barriers
such as dams impede the spread of round gobies, only sites
downstream of such barriers were considered in our analysis
such that all sites were connected to Lake Michigan without
interruption. Each site was electrofished for 20 min, working
upstream and sampling from bank to bank so as to cover all
microhabitats (mean area sampled was 268 m2 ± 28 SE). All
fish captured were identified, measured, enumerated and
released at the site of capture except for round gobies, which
were euthanized with tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222)
and retained. Catch per unit effort (CPUE, measured in individuals
captured per minute of electrofishing) was used as a
proxy for species density throughout.
Round goby absence at some sites may have been due to
lack of colonization time or failure to detect round goby
presence. We estimated a 75% probability of detection when
round gobies were rare, based on twelve 20-min electrofishing
samples at sites with the minimum CPUE (0.05
fish min
1) detected by our method (Kornis & Vander
Zanden, 2010). We found round gobies at 0.05 CPUE at 8
of 30 goby-present sites; if our 75% detection probability for
such sites is accurate, we would anticipate only a handful of
absences (two to three sites) owing to detection failure.
Regarding colonization time, sampling conducted in 2008
detected round goby presence at five of our 2007 absence
sites, and these sites were considered ‘invaded’ in this study.
Most absence sites (44/52) occurred in streams where round
gobies were not observed, however, and the eight absence
sites that occurred upstream of a presence site typically had
suboptimal goby habitat (high stream gradient, sandy/silty
substrate). Although we cannot rule out lack of colonization
time or inability to detect presence as sources of goby absences,
unfavourable environmental conditions likely played a much
larger role.
A total of 23 sites were selected for the multi-year monitoring
portion of this study. At these sites, round gobies cooccurred
with at least one of five indigenous benthic stream
fishes during summer 2007: Johnny darter (Etheostoma nigrum),
mottled sculpin (Cottus bairdii), logperch (Percina caprodes),
blackside darter (Percina maculata) and fantail darter
(Etheostoma flabellare). These five indigenous species were
selected because of previous studies from the Great Lakes
indicating negative effects of round gobies (Janssen & Jude,
2001; Lauer et al., 2004; Balshine et al., 2005) or because of
suspected diet and habitat overlap (Poos et al., 2010). Each
of these 23 sites was sampled again in 2010 using identical
electrofishing methods, allowing for comparison of round
goby and native species CPUE between years. We examined
the change in round goby and native fish CPUE from 2007
to 2010, expressed as a ratio, such that positive values indicate
an increase and negative values indicate a decrease in
CPUE. Ratios were calculated by
þ2010 CPUE
2007 CPUE
when CPUE increased from 2007 to 2010 and calculated by
2007 CPUE
2010 CPUE
when CPUE decreased from 2007 to 2010. To allow a ratio
calculation when native species absence resulted in a 0
denominator, absences were assigned a CPUE value of
0.05 fish min
1, equivalent to the minimum possible capture
(one fish) in a standard 20-min electrofishing survey.
Round goby density was estimated in four rivers (three
sites in each river) through depletion electrofishing methods
following Bohlin et al. (1989). At each of these 12 sites, a
reach was cordoned off with two block nets and sampled in
three consecutive electrofishing passes. A tow boat electrofishing
unit with gas-generated pulsed DC current was used
instead of the battery-powered backpack unit to provide a
larger electrical field, resulting in greater capture efficiency
and reducing the number of passes needed to observe clean
depletion curves. These sites had predominantly run geomorphology,
were comparable in terms of environmental characteristics
and represented sites with above-average round goby
CPUE. Average area sampled was 202 ± 60 (SD) m2, mean
substrate size was 123 ± 43 mm, water temperature
19.4 ± 3.5 °C, stream width 10.5 ± 2.1 m and mean depth
0.38 ± 0.11 m.
Environmental variables
Several landscape-scale variables [watershed area, watershed
slope, watershed soil permeability, mean July air temperature
(a correlate of water temperature), baseflow index (90% exceedance
flow/watershed area), stream gradient and watershed land
use (categorized as per cent urban, agricultural, wetland and
forested land)] were considered in our multivariate analysis of
fish community composition. These data were obtained from
a geographical information system (GIS) database (US
Geological Survey, Great Lakes Aquatic GAP Analysis Project)
and were calculated on the scale of confluence-bound stream
segments, with each segment between the confluence of two
streams considered as one unit. Conductivity, water temperature
and per cent substrate composition, assessed at each site,
were also considered potential predictors of fish community
structure. Per cent substrate composition was visually assessed
into the following categories: silt, sand, gravel, rock (cobble
and boulder) or bedrock. Conductivity and water temperature
were measured using a YSI 85 metre (YSI Inc., Yellow Springs,
OH, USA). Watershed area values were log-transformed to
produce a non-skewed distribution, and each environmental
variable was z-standardized to convert all environmental data
to the same unitless scale.
Statistical methods
Stream fish communities were related to environmental conditions
and round goby CPUE using a redundancy analysis
(RDA; Van den Wollenberg, 1977). RDA is a direct gradient
analysis technique that partitions variation in community
composition into components associated with multiple predictor
variables. The response variables in a RDA can be
expressed as a linear combination of the predictor variables,
and the approach handles species abundance data, sample
sites and environmental data simultaneously (Borcard et al.,
1992). It is especially useful in understanding patterns of
community composition and has been applied to fish communities
in several contexts (Angermeier & Winston, 1999;
Sharma et al., 2011). Rare species (species occurring in < 5%
of sites) were removed from the analysis, as they can have a
disproportionate effect on ordinations (Jackson & Harvey,
1989). Tubenose gobies (Proterorhinus semilunaris), a Great
Lakes invader in the same family as round goby (Gobiidae),
were not captured at any of our sites. Species CPUE data
were transformed using Hellinger distance, which decreases
the importance of the most abundant species, as recommended
by Legendre & Gallagher (2001). The subset of seven
environmental predictors used for this analysis were selected
because they explained a significant amount of variation in
the community data (P < 0.05) and were minimally correlated
(Pearson correlation coefficient, all r2 < 0.35). The
‘packfor’ R package (creators: Ste´phane Dray, Pierre Legendre
and Guilluame Blanchet) was used for the RDA analysis
and included a forward selection procedure (env.sel) from
which our subset of environmental variables was chosen. The
package is available at http://www.bio.umontreal.ca/legendre/
indexEn.html.
Redundancy analysis, correlation analysis and linear
regressions were performed using the R statistical package
(version 2.13.2; www.r-project.org/). The map depicting
round goby presence/absence and sample sites was constructed
using ARC-GIS software (ESRI, Redlands, CA, USA).


xresults
Patterns of round goby abundance
Round goby CPUE (number of fish captured per minute of
electrofishing) and % relative abundance (% of total numerical
catch) had strongly right-skewed distributions, with low
CPUE and % relative abundance values at most invaded sites
(Fig. 2). Round gobies were the numerically dominant
species at four of the 30 invaded sites (sites in Big Creek,
Pensuakee R., Sheboygan R. and Suamico R.). At these four
sites (Fig. 1), round goby relative abundance ranged from
31.5 to 83.3% of all individuals captured, and CPUE was
significantly greater at these sites (mean of 0.83 fish min
1)
than at sites where gobies were not dominant (mean of
0.31 fish min
1) (P = 0.02, t = 2.56, d.f. = 27, two-tailed
Student’s t-test assuming equal variance). Round goby relative
abundance was 15.3% of all individuals captured on
average, but this value drops to 8.8% excluding the four sites
where they are numerically dominant. See Table S1 for
stream names, global positioning system (GPS) coordinates
and round goby CPUE of all sites.
Round goby density was estimated through 39 depletions
at a subset of sites (n = 12 sites in 4 streams) to provide a
value comparable with other studies and ranged from 0.07 to
0.36 fish m
2. These sites represent areas with comparatively
high round goby CPUE (mean of 0.53 in subset vs. 0.27 at
goby-present sites not in subset).
Predictors of round goby CPUE
A RDA found only two environmental characteristics,
watershed area and water temperature, to be significant predictors
of round goby CPUE. These two predictors explained
22.4% of the variation in round goby CPUE. Two biological
predictors, species richness and Shannon diversity (Shannon
& Weaver, 1949), only explained an additional 2.3% of the
variation in round goby CPUE when added to the analysis.
A RDA using only the two biological predictors explained
6.9% of the variation in round goby CPUE, and neither
biological characteristic was a significant predictor.
Patterns in native fish communities
Three community metrics, Shannon diversity, fish species
richness and total fish CPUE, were compared for invaded
and non-invaded sites (Table 2). Round goby sites had significantly
greater Shannon diversity (1.56 vs. 1.23) and species
richness (9.38 vs. 6.54) compared with non-invaded sites
(P = 0.003 and < 0.001, respectively). Excluding gobies from
diversity and richness calculations produced similar though
less significant results (species richness, 8.38 vs. 6.54,
P = 0.02; Shannon diversity, 1.44 vs. 1.23, P = 0.07). Neither
total CPUE nor non-goby CPUE differed significantly
between invaded and non-invaded sites.
A RDA examining how the CPUE of 23 fish species related
to seven environmental variables and round goby CPUE
explained 31.2% of the variation in species-specific CPUE
(Fig. 3). 15.3% of the variation was explained in the first
two axes. Round goby CPUE was not a significant predictor
of stream fish community composition (P = 0.28) but was
included in the RDA because of biological relevance. Round
goby CPUE was most strongly related to watershed area and
mean July air temperature, although% rocky substrate and
baseflow index were also positively associated. Species that
fell within 0.1 RDA units of the origin were considered
generalists relative to the predictor variables included in the
RDA. As the round goby CPUE aligns primarily with the
x-axis of the RDA plot, species with RDA1 values of less
than 0.1 were considered positively associated with round
gobies while species with RDA1 values of greater than 0.1
were considered negatively associated with round goby. In
total, eight taxa were positively associated with round goby
CPUE, including three members of Percidae (Johnny darter,
logperch and blackside darter), two members of Cyprinidae
(hornyhead chub and common shiner) and three members
of Centrarchidae (green sunfish, rock bass and smallmouth
bass). Five species were negatively associated with round
goby CPUE, including yellow perch, one species tolerant of
low oxygen conditions (central mudminnow) and three taxa
that are associated with cooler water temperature and higher
gradient systems (rainbow trout, mottled sculpin and brook
stickleback). Four species had differences in CPUE of at least
1.0 fish min
1 between goby-present and goby-absent sites:
yellow perch, bluntnose minnow, brook stickleback and creek
chub, although no statistically significant differences were
found (Bonferroni-corrected a of 0.002). Sites where native
species were absent were not included in these comparisons
because our RDA indicated that such absences are far more
likely to be due to environmental characteristics than round
goby presence/absence.
Impact of round gobies on native benthic fishes
We compared the change in CPUE from 2007 to 2010 for
round gobies to that of five indigenous species: Johnny
darter, mottled sculpin, logperch, fantail darter and blackside
darter (Fig. 4). Between 2007 and 2010, round goby
abundance increased at 19 of 23 sites, with at least a doubling
of round goby CPUE at 65% of sites (15 of 23). On
average, round goby CPUE was 10.8 times higher in 2010
than in 2007; at five sites, CPUE had increased more than
20-fold from 2007 to 2010. Despite increases in round gobies
CPUE, native species CPUE showed no major trends. The
change in CPUE of Johnny darter (P = 0.87), mottled sculpin
(P = 0.81), logperch (P = 0.24), blackside darter
(P = 0.40) and fantail darter (P = 0.99) did not significantly
correlate with the change in round goby CPUE.
We also compared species richness at three of the four
round goby–dominated sites (Fig. 1) to other sites located
within the same river (n = 4 sites per river). Sites where
round gobies were numerically dominant had 2.9 fewer
native species on average when compared to other sites in
the same rivers (P = 0.08, d.f. = 2, two-tailed paired t-test).
This difference was at least partially explained by the absence
of darter species (one or two of Johnny darter, fantail darter,
blackside darter or logperch, depending on the stream) at
the goby-dominated site compared with other sites in the
river (average of 1.11 fewer darter species at the gobydominated
site).


xdiscussion
We found round gobies were associated with high diversity
streams, and we attribute this result not to high species
diversity per se, but rather to round gobies inhabiting
streams with an environmental profile that facilitates high
species richness. Although the potential for diverse species
assemblages to resist species invasions is well documented
(Tilman et al., 1996; Hooper & Vitousek, 1998; Knops et al.,
1999; Kennedy et al., 2002), environmental characteristics are
often a greater structuring force than biodiversity (Moyle &
Light, 1996; Holway et al., 2002), and abiotic factors
favouring diversity can favour invasion success (Levine &
D’Antonio, 1999; Foster et al., 2002; Marchetti et al., 2004).
Our results corroborate this: a RDA of round goby
abundance based on environmental characteristics explained
three times as much variation as a RDA based on biological
descriptors. Additionally, we observed greater native species
richness (number of taxa) in streams invaded by round
gobies (P = 0.02, Table 2). This may be related to a positive
association between round goby abundance and watershed
area and a negative association with environmental variables
(i.e. high slope, cool temperature) typical of lower order
streams (Fig. 3). Fish diversity, resource availability and
habitat complexity tend to increase with watershed area
(Gorman & Karr, 1978; Schlosser, 1982; Fauch et al., 1984;
Lamberti & Steinman, 1997), though specific sites may be
exceptions (Bott et al., 1985). Round gobies also have an
energetic optimum temperature of about 26 °C (Lee & Johnson,
2005) and appear to avoid colder streams (Kornis &
Vander Zanden, 2010), which tend to support fewer species
(Magnuson et al., 1979). Our findings therefore support
recent evaluations of the diversity/resistance hypothesis
suggesting abiotic factors positively correlated with species
diversity improve invasion success, and often override the
resistance effects of species richness (Stohlgren et al., 1999;
Levine & D’Antonio, 1999; Hooper et al., 2005).
We report a positive relationship between round goby
presence and native species diversity, contrasting the finding
that invasive species often contribute to biodiversity loss
(Ricciardi & Rasmussen, 1998; Clavero & Garcı´a-Berthou,
2005; Dextrase & Mandrake, 2006). Round gobies have been
implicated in localized species extirpations and abundance
declines in the Laurentian Great Lakes by several studies
(Janssen & Jude, 2001; Lauer et al., 2004; Balshine et al.,
2005). In contrast, we found stream fish community composition
was strongly associated with environmental variables and
not goby abundance. RDA only explained 30.3% of the variation
in species-specific abundance, likely because the sampling
strategy did not account for variables such as the chance
distribution and establishment of individuals, animal activity,
local disturbances or fine-scale environmental heterogeneity
(Gauch, 1982).
Although round goby abundance was not a significant
factor in shaping stream communities, our analysis highlights
several associations between round gobies and native species.
Species positively associated with round goby abundance
likely to be found in systems susceptible to invasion and
may be vulnerable to negative effects. Amongst these species
are three small, benthic Percid species – Johnny darter, logperch
and blackside darter – that are particularly at risk
because of dietary and habitat overlap with round goby
(French & Jude, 2001; Poos et al., 2010). However, our study
found no changes in the abundance of these species despite
increases in round goby abundance from 2007 to 2010.
Species negatively associated with round gobies are unlikely
to co-occur because of preference for habitat characteristics
suboptimal for round goby, including tolerance of low
oxygen conditions (central mudminnow), watersheds with
higher slope and faster flow (rainbow trout, brook stickleback)
and cooler temperature (mottled sculpin). We also
observed a negative association between yellow perch and
round gobies, a finding opposite to that of one Great Lakes
study (Dopazo et al. 2008). Similarly, limited co-occurrence
of mottled sculpin and round goby in streams is particularly
interesting as mottled sculpin declines in Lake Michigan were
associated with round goby invasion (Janssen & Jude, 2001).
This suggests round gobies, mottled sculpin and yellow perch
share habitat preferences in the Great Lakes but not in tributaries.
Impact assessments are emerging as an important component
of understanding and managing invasive species, but
impacts are often heterogeneous across an invaded range.
Parker et al. (1999) define an invader’s impact by its range,
abundance and per-capita effect. High abundance is often
considered a defining quality for invasive species (Kolar &
Lodge, 2001; Vale´ry et al., 2008), but recent evidence (G.J.A.
Hansen, M.J. Vander Zanden, M.J. Blum, M.K. Clayton, E.F.
Hain, J. Hauxwell, M. Izzo, M.S. Kornis, P.B. McIntyre, A.
Mikulyuk, E. Nilsson, J.D. Olden, M. Papes, and S. Sharma,
in review) suggests aquatic invasive species across a wide
range of taxa (plants, molluscs, crustaceans and fishes) tend
to have high abundance at few locations and low abundance
at most locations throughout their range. This follows the
same general trend observed for most native species (Brown
et al., 1995, 1996). Our results suggest differences between
round goby abundance and impact between the Laurentian
Great Lakes and some of their tributaries. Round gobies are
rapidly increasing in abundance in Lake Michigan tributaries,
but current densities (0.07–0.36 fish m
2 at sites with aboveaverage
round goby CPUE) are low when compared to estimates
from the Laurentian Great Lakes. Johnson et al.
(2005) reported round goby densities ranging from
0.62 fish m
2 in sandy habitat to 6.94 fish m
2 in rocky
habitat in western Lake Erie, while Taraborelli et al. (2009)
reported densities from 0.63 to 3.88 fish m
2 across depth
and substrate gradients in the Bay of Quinte, Lake Ontario.
This comparison is limited by different density estimation
methods (video transects vs. depletion electrofishing) and by
a low number of studies reporting density (most report relative
abundance). Relative abundance and CPUE data from
our study can be compared with values reported from the
downstream sections of Lake Erie tributaries owing to similar
sampling methods. Round goby relative abundance is greater
in these tributaries, with a mean of 33.5% vs. 15.3% reported
from our study (Lake Erie mean combined from Phillips
et al., 2003 and Krakowiak & Pennuto, 2008). CPUE is also
greater, with abundance increasing from spring to autumn
and peaking at 7.2 and 12.6 fish min
1 in October. At 96%
of our invaded sites, round goby CPUE was < 1 fish min
1,
with 1.8 fish min
1 the maximum observed value. This demonstrates
heterogeneity in round goby abundance amongst
tributaries, which may be due to differences in habitat suitability
or population residence time.
Our ability to compare impact between Great Lake and
tributary habitats is limited to comparing short-term effects
on native benthic fishes; nevertheless, trends were notably
different in these two habitat types. Johnny darter and
mottled sculpin populations precipitously declined within
1–2 years following the discovery of round gobies in southern
Lake Michigan (Janssen & Jude, 2001; Lauer et al., 2004).
Round gobies have also been associated with declines in logperch
abundance (Balshine et al., 2005) and were predicted
to negatively impact blackside and fantail darter abundance
(Poos et al., 2010). Conversely, we observed no significant
change in the abundance of five indigenous benthic fishes
from 2007 to 2010 despite dramatic increases in round goby
abundance. Although our comparisons are limited in scope,
the density and impact discrepancies between ecosystems
described here highlight the importance of considering an
invader’s density when managing for their impacts.
Although we report limited round goby abundance and
impact on fishes in Lake Michigan tributaries thus far, this
could potentially be due to sites only recently becoming
invaded (e.g. short residency time). The observed increase in
round goby abundance from 2007 to 2010 raises concerns
that more prominent impacts will develop over time. There
is often a time lag between invader establishment and growth
in abundance (Crooks & Soule´, 2001), and other studies
have reported high round goby abundance in tributaries with
longer resident populations (Phillips et al., 2003; Carman
et al., 2006; Pennuto et al., 2010). Although major gobyrelated
changes to fish communities have been reported over
short time periods in areas of the Great Lakes (Janssen &
Jude, 2001; Lauer et al., 2004), similar changes may take
longer to develop in stream ecosystems. Our comparison of
invaded and uninvaded communities/habitats is also limited
by the short residency time of round gobies in tributaries. As
of 2007, round gobies only occupied about 20% of their
forecasted range in habitats downstream of impassable
barriers (Kornis & Vander Zanden, 2010). Although many
uninvaded sites examined by our study fit an environmental
profile unfavourable to round gobies (e.g. cooler water temperature,
high stream gradient), several of these sites may
become invaded as the range expands in the region. This is
especially likely for the 11 of our 52 absence sites that were
predicted to be invaded by the range forecast model presented
by Kornis & Vander Zanden (2010). Assessments of
early-stage invasions tend to underpredict potential range
and impact compared with those conducted at later stages
(Va´clavı´k & Meentemeyer, 2012). However, early-stage
characterization of an invader’s impact and preferred habitat
provides a greater opportunity to use gained information for
preventative management, a distinct advantage over late-stage
studies. We recommend further investigation into the effects
of invader residency time on the accuracy of invasion assessments,
with a focus on identifying stages of invasion that
maximize the trade-off between accuracy and utility.
This study highlights several challenges in studying and
managing species invasions. An invader’s abundance and
impact will likely vary at multiple spatial scales, and assessments
of this variability could better inform decision makers.
In the case of round gobies, we highlighted different shortterm
impacts on native benthic fishes between lake and
stream ecosystems, provided evidence that abundance could
differ between these systems and described variability in
abundance among stream sites. Management decisions often
take place at local scales, and evaluation of invader impact at
this scale may be essential to this process. In addition,
greater clarity is needed when referring to invasion success,
which can be defined by either presence or abundance. This
and other studies (Moyle & Light, 1996; Foster et al., 2002;
Hooper et al., 2005) point to environmental characteristics
as the predominant factor in the establishment of invasive
species, a relationship that can produce positive associations
between invader presence and indigenous species diversity.
What promotes invader presence will not necessarily promote
abundance, however, as competitor density and
diversity may limit invader abundance by reducing niche
opportunity. The relative importance of environmental and
biological factors will differ on a species-by-species basis.
Incorporating both environmental and biological factors in
understanding the spread, abundance and impact of invasive
species will lead to improved ability to assess, predict and
effectively manage for their effects.