xabstract
Round gobies have had significant impacts on benthic fish and invertebrate communities
in nearshore habitats of the Great Lakes. As round gobies have become more abundant in lake habitats,
there has been an expansion of their populations into tributary streams and rivers. We compared stream
invertebrate and fish communities in New York tributaries to Lake Erie with round gobies present and
absent. Four of six benthic invertebrate metrics differed between streams with and without round gobies.
Streams with round gobies present had reduced Shannon diversity, EPT richness, and EPT/chironomid
ratios, and increased macroinvertebrate density relative to streams without round gobies, but there was
no difference in non-Diptera density, or total taxa richness. None of the four fish metrics examined differed
between streams with and without round gobies. However, darters occurred in all streams lacking
round gobies, but did not occur in any streams with round gobies. Comparisons with historical fish and
macroinvertebrate distributional data support our suspicion of goby-induced community changes. In
these New York streams, round gobies seem to have had significant impacts on invertebrate communities
via their consumptive behavior, whereas the impacts on fish communities are less evident. If round gobies
continue to expand their distribution inland, the resultant alterations in macroinvertebrate communities
may impact the suitability of tributary streams as spawning and nursery habitat for several sport fish
species and for energy dynamics in tributary streams.

xintroduction
Within a decade of its initial introduction, the
round goby (hereafter referred to as goby) has become
established in all of the Great Lakes, and in
many nearshore habitats it is sometimes the most
abundant fish encountered, reaching high population
densities (Johnson et al. 2005, USGS 2006).
Their abundance, in part, has led to significant impacts
on nearshore benthic invertebrate and fish
communities. Ratti and Barton (2003) reported a
decline in the richness of benthic invertebrates in
the wave-zone of eastern Lake Erie, finding 122
taxa pre-goby (1974) and 83 taxa post-goby (2001).
Some taxa increased in abundance (especially the
co-invasive Dreissena bugensis and Echinogammarus
ischnus), but Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera,
and other insects decreased in abundance. Kuhns
and Berg (1999) documented a similar decline in
non-mussel invertebrates with goby presence in
southern Lake Michigan. Fish species also have
been impacted. Mottled sculpin (Cottus bairdi) and
Johnny darter (Etheostoma nigrum) populations
have declined in areas of Lake Michigan since
round gobies were first netted in 1998 (Lauer
2004). Chotkowski and Marsden (1999) showed
that lake trout egg predation by round gobies was
substantial and Steinhart et al. (2004) documented
declines in smallmouth bass embryo survival within
minutes after guarding males were angled from
nests. These studies highlight field correlations between
goby abundance and the decline of native
macroinvertebrate and fish species.
Recent distributional studies indicate round gobies
are migrating up Great Lake tributary streams.
Phillips et al. (2003) showed that four of six Pennsylvania
tributaries sampled had gobies present. In
Elk Creek, gobies comprised almost 20% of the
number of fish caught and were found 2.25 km upstream
from the mouth of the creek. Similarly,
Weimer (2003) showed gobies had invaded up to
1.5 km upstream in Eighteen Mile Creek, New
York, and gobies currently are found about 40 km
up the New York State Canal (Erie Canal) and continue
to spread eastward (M. Goehle, USFWS, pers.
comm., 2006). Several streams and rivers in Michigan
now have gobies present (D. Jude, pers. comm.,
U Michigan, 2006). It is unclear whether round gobies
will change stream fish and macroinvertebrate
communities or disrupt stream ecosystem energy
flow to the extent they have in the Great Lakes.
Like their lake counterparts, round gobies in
stream habitats have diverse, macroinvertebratedominated
diets composed mainly of chironomids
and mayflies (Phillips et al. 2003, Weimer 2003,
Carman et al. 2006, Lederer et al. 2006). As lakedwelling
gobies increase in size, they exhibit an ontogenetic
diet shift at about 60 to 70 mm SL,
switching to a predominantly mollusc-based diet
consisting of Dreissena mussels (Jude et al. 1995,
French and Jude 2001). Most streams draining into
the Great Lakes are devoid of Dreissena mussels,
and thus large stream-dwelling gobies need to consume
alternative prey. In Pennsylvania streams, gobies
> 75 mm had diets composed primarily of
Heptageniidae and Caenidae nymphs whereas those
< 75 mm contained mostly chironomid larvae
(Phillips et al. 2003). In the Flint River, Michigan,
Carman et al. (2006) demonstrated that goby size
was not the only factor affecting diet composition.
Prey choice varied depending on the availability of
different prey items throughout the day with hydropsychid
caddisfly and chironomid larvae predominating
during the day, chironomid pupae
towards the evening, and heptageniid mayfly larvae
at night.
Expansion of goby populations into tributary
streams of the Great Lakes has several implications.
Egg predation by round gobies poses a threat to
many species of game fish that spawn in these
streams. Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and
smallmouth bass (Micropterus dolomieui) are two
important sport fish that spawn in tributary streams
of Lake Erie, and their populations ultimately may
be reduced through egg predation by round gobies.
Juveniles of these same species, as well as smaller
benthic fish like darters and sculpins, prey upon
macroinvertebrates, the primary food source of
round gobies in stream communities. It is important
that we understand the potential effects of this invasive
fish in this new class of habitat, tributary
streams, to more fully understand its impact within
the Great Lakes watershed.
The goal of this study was to examine the
macroinvertebrate and fish communities in tributary
streams to Lake Erie with and without round gobies.
The abundance, taxa richness, taxa diversity,
and occurrence of specific taxa of macroinvertebrates
and fish were compared between streams
with and without gobies. Because gobies have had
significant impacts on benthic communities in lake
habitats, we hypothesized that streams with this invasive
fish present would also exhibit reduced
macroinvertebrate and fish abundance, richness,
and diversity relative to streams with gobies absent.

xmethods
Using 7.5 minute Quad maps, we identified nine
potential streams with enough flow to support fish
populations (Fig. 1), and which drained directly
into Lake Erie between Buffalo, NY and the state
line with Pennsylvania. Streams varied in size, substrate,
and hydrologic condition, but had similar
chemical environments (Table 1). We sampled fish
and macroinvertebrate communities in a 50-m
stream section within each stream near the stream
mouth but upstream enough to avoid lake influence
on flow. Sampling continued until we had at least
four streams with and four streams without round
gobies. We then compared macroinvertebrate and
fish community composition among sites differing
in goby presence or absence.
Streams were sampled once between 31 May and
13 July, 2005. We assessed fish communities using
a Coffelt Electronics BP-6 backpack electroshocker
(170 volts, 500 pps, DC-pulse, 150-350 seconds).
All macrohabitats (e.g., pools, riffles, runs) were
shocked within the 50-m reach working in an upstream
direction. All fish, other than round gobies,
were identified in the field, measured, weighed, and
released. Round gobies were weighed and mea
sured, and then preserved in 90% ethyl alcohol.
Any fish that could not be identified in the field
was preserved for later identification. For historical
comparisons, fish community data from pre-goby
invasion (1995) were obtained from the NY DEC
(J. Evans, personal comm.) for all streams with existing
data. Pre-goby fish samples were collected
either via seining or electrofishing and no effort
was taken to provide comparable abundance estimates
with the current data. Thus, only qualitative
presence/absence comparisons were made between
current and historical data.
Ten Surber samples (0.5 mm mesh, 0.093 m2)
were collected from random locations at each site,
disturbing substrate to a depth of ~10 cm, where
possible. Additionally, a single 5-m traveling kick
sample (0.5-mm mesh, 45-cm opening) was collected
from riffle habitats in each stream following
Surber collections and according to the New York
DEC protocol of Bode et al (2002). Invertebrates
and debris were transferred into Whirlpak bags,
preserved in 90% ethyl alcohol, and sorted and
identified in the laboratory. All macroinvertebrates
were identified to the taxonomic level indicated in
Table 2 using keys of Peckarsky et al. (1990) and
Merritt and Cummings (1996). Typically, insect larvae
were identified to genus.
Kick samples were treated according to the
bioassessment protocol of Bode et al. (2002). Samples
were placed in a gridded sorting tray and a
random square was examined for all macroinvertebrates.
Random squares were processed in this
manner until 100 organisms had been obtained.
Metrics of Shannon diversity, taxa richness, percent
EPT (Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera, Trichoptera), and
percent Chironomidae were then determined. We
also obtained pre-goby (1993) macroinvertebrate
data from the NY DEC (B. Bode, Stream Biomonitoring
Unit, NY DEC) for sites in their sampling
program that were at the same location as our sampling
sites (RIBS, Bode et al. 2002). Walnut, Eighteen
Mile, Delaware, and Silver creeks were
sampled in the same locations in 1993 and 2005.
No sites had round gobies present in 1993, but Walnut
and Eighteen Mile creeks contained gobies in
2005.
Nineteen water quality measurements and habitat
condition variables were measured at each site,
prior to fish or invertebrate sampling. A single,
mid-depth grab sample was collected for determination
of water temperature and dissolved oxygen
(YSI Model 50B dissolved oxygen meter), conductivity
(Oakton Con5 Acorn Series conductivity
meter), and turbidity (LaMotte Model 2020 turbidity
meter). Habitat metrics were recorded after fish
and macroinvertebrate sampling had occurred. Wetted
stream width was measured perpendicular to
stream flow at 10-meter intervals throughout the
study reach. Stream velocity (cm/s) and depth were
measured at 1-m intervals across the stream width
(Swoffer Model 2100 flow meter). We derived
stream discharge (Q; m3/s) from stream depth and
velocity measurements. Canopy cover was estimated
using a crown densitometer at ten equidistant
points, zig-zagged across the 50-m stretch of
stream. The surrounding land use, such as residential,
agricultural, or forested, was noted as well.
Lastly, percent substrate particle size was estimated
visually into seven categories: bedrock, boulder,
cobble, pebble, sand, silt/mud, and detritus.
Statistical Analyses
Patterns within the fish and macroinvertebrate
community data, and their relationship to environmental
parameters, were first constrained with nonmetric
multidimensional scaling using algorithms
of Mather (1976) to determine how well the environmental
data “explained” the observed community
data. This analysis was performed with the
software PC-ORD Ver. 4 (McCune and Medford
1999). All abundance data were ln (x+1)-transformed
prior to ordination procedures and only taxa
occurring in > 3 streams were entered into the ordination.
Categorical environmental data were not
used in the ordination analysis. Data restrictions resulted
in a 15-variable, environmental matrix, and
fish and macroinvertebrate matrices of 10 and 20
taxa, respectively. For both ordinations, Bray-Curtis
distance measures were applied. Bray-Curtis distance
(also called Sørensen distance) measure the
dissimilarity between any two items in a sample
matrix and is commonly employed in ecological
studies (e.g., Magurran 1988, McCune and Grace
2002).
Maximized stress reductions were used to deci-
pher the appropriate number of axes useful in explaining
patterns in the data. A Monte Carlo simulation
of 50 randomized runs of the data was used
to infer stress reduction, seeking random runs
which had stress values significantly less than the
original data at p < 0.05. Pearson correlations were
used to correlate environmental, macroinvertebrate,
and fish community data against the resultant ordination
axes. Additionally, Pearson correlations were
applied to all environmental parameters and community
data to assist interpretation of the ordination
axes. In ordination plots, only environmental variables
with R2 values ³ 0.50 were graphed as this
represented the appropriate correlation for an a =
0.05.
Several indices were used to assess both fish and
macroinvertebrate community differences in
streams with and without round gobies. Total
macroinvertebrate density, non-Diptera density,
taxa richness, Shannon diversity, EPT richness, and
the EPT/Chironomidae ratio were used to compare
macroinvertebrate communities in goby-present and
goby-absent streams. Additionally, pre- and postgoby
invasion taxa richness, Shannon diversity, percent
EPT and percent Chironomidae were compared
for the four sites with 1993 and 2005 data.
Fish communities in goby-present and goby-absent
streams were assessed using taxa richness, Shannon
diversity, catch per unit effort (CPUE), and biomass
per unit effort (BPUE). Additionally, observed fish
species presence/absence was compared to historical
NY DEC presence/absence data for all streams
for which data could be obtained (J. Evans, NY
DEC, personal comm.).
A series of 2-level nested ANOVAs was used to
compare the Surber macroinvertebrate data metrics
from streams with and without round gobies.
Analyses were performed on log (x+1)-transformed
data to meet variance assumptions. The analysis deciphered
the differences among “goby/no goby
streams” and among “all streams.” It also provided
estimates of the error within and among all streams.
When a significant among stream or among
goby/no goby term was detected, an adjusted Bonferroni
post-hoc test was computed. Each pre- and
post-goby invasion macroinvertebrate metric was
compared using a G-test testing whether any
change in a metric was independent of goby presence.
The fish metrics were assessed using onetailed
Students’s t-tests and a Bonferroni-adjusted
significance level of p < 0.0125 (0.05/4) after determining
variance homogeneity and normality of the
data.

xresults
The eight tributary streams sampled had similar
chemical environments, but exhibited high variability
in hydrologic and physical conditions (Table 1).
All sites had pH values between 7.5 and 8.5, and
water clarity was < 10 NTU at all sites except Little
Sister Creek (NTU = 29.8). Streams with round gobies
had higher discharge levels, greater mean
depth and were predominantly forested (Table 1).
Some environmental parameters were correlated
to each other. Dissolved oxygen was negatively correlated
with turbidity whereas it was positively correlated
with percent sand substrate (r = –0.862, p =
0.01; r = 0.797, p = 0.03, respectively). Percent
cobble substrate was positively correlated with
maximum velocity (r = 0.814, p = 0.03). Lastly,
mean channel width was positively correlated with
mean depth (r = 0.860, p = 0.01).
Gobies were present in four of the eight tributary
streams that were sampled. Eighteen Mile, Big Sister,
Little Sister, and Walnut creeks had goby populations
(Fig. 1). When gobies were present, they
made up at least 50% of the number of fish collected.
No quantitative data were collected in Eighteen
Mile Creek due to a malfunction of the
backpack electroshocker; however, round gobies
were observed visually and collected by seining.
Non-metric Multi-dimensional Scaling
The ordination of fish community and environmental
data yielded only a single axis that provided
significant explanatory power. Fish communities
aligned along this axis based on stream size, and
gobies were found only in the largest streams. Thus,
there was a strong autocorrelation between fish
community structure, presence of round gobies, and
stream size. The single axis resulting from the fish
ordination explained less than 20% of the pattern in
fish communities (R2 = 0.182). The axis primarily
represented substrate composition and hydrologic
variables. Only mean velocity and percent silt/mud
had significant correlations with the resultant axis
(r = –0.707 and 0.833, respectively; both p < 0.05).
No individual fish species ordination score had a
significant correlation with the resultant ordination
axis (all p > 0.05).
Three axes were formed by the ordination of
macroinvertebrate density and environmental data.
The stress value was low (1.239), as was the final
instability score (0.037), indicating that the 3-axis
ordination captured a majority of the variability in
the data. A Monte-Carlo simulation of 50 random
permutations of the data suggested that the final
stress value was not computed by chance (p =
0.039). The three axes cumulatively explained 95%
of the variation between ordination distances and
the original data (R2 = 0.950), but Axes 2 and 3 explained
most of the variation (cumulative R2 =
0.858, Fig. 2). Percent silt/mud, mean depth, and
conductivity were significantly correlated with Axis
2 (r = 0.746, 0.787, and 0.817; all p < 0.05),
whereas mean velocity, dissolved oxygen content,
and turbidity were significantly correlated with
Axis 3 (r = 0.818, 0.722, and –0.720, respectively;
all p < 0.05). Hydropsyche, Chimarra, Orconectes
propinquus, Empididae, and Stenelmis were the
only invertebrate taxa significantly correlated with
Axis 2 (r = –0.710, –0.795, 0.748, –0.739, and
0.857, respectively; all p < 0.05, except Stenelmis
< 0.01). Five taxa, Hydropsyche, Baetis,
Gammarus, Psephenus, and Simulidae, had a significant
correlation with Axis 3 (r = 0.796, 0.711,
–0.745, –0.719, and 0.843, respectively; all p <
0.05, except Simulidae p < 0.01). The invertebrate
ordination among these streams indicated a slight
tendency to cluster as “small,” non-silt bottom,
rapid flow stream communities (to the left and
above the centroid) and “large,” soft-substrate, slow
flow stream communities (to the right and below
the centroid, Fig. 2).
Streams with and without round gobies did not
cluster well in ordination space (Fig. 2). Four of the
eight streams fell to the right or left of the ordination
centroid and four were above or below the centroid.
Interestingly, three of four goby-present
streams were found right of the centroid along Axis
2, indicating that this axis may have some utility in
describing goby presence. This axis was associated
with stream size data. The “largest” streams were
the deepest, had the largest percent silt/mud substrate,
and the greatest conductivity. Alternatively,
three of the four goby-absent streams appeared
below the centroid along Axis 3 (Fig. 2), indicating
this axis was a better descriptor of goby absence.
This area of the graph was represented most by turbidity.
Round Goby Relationship to
Macroinvertebrate Communities
A total of 57 invertebrate taxa was collected
among the eight streams (Table 2). Of these, 10
were found only in streams with round gobies present,
19 were found only in streams without gobies,
and 28 occurred in both stream types. Several
macroinvertebrate community indices were correlated
to some of the environmental variables. Total
invertebrate density was positively correlated with
mean channel width and negatively correlated with
the percent canopy cover (r = 0.770 and –0.763;
both p = 0.04). Non-Diptera density was positively
correlated with maximum stream velocity (r =
0.799, p = 0.03). Macroinvertebrate taxa richness
was negatively correlated with conductivity (r =
–0.814, p = 0.03). Shannon diversity was negatively
correlated with mean channel width, mean depth,
and conductivity (r = –0.798, –0.952, and –0.767,
respectively; p = 0.03, 0.001, and 0.04). EPT richness
was positively correlated with the maximum
velocity of the stream and negatively correlated
with conductivity (r = 0.786, p = 0.04; r = –0.884,
p = 0.008, respectively). The EPT/chironomid ratio
was negatively correlated with conductivity (r =
–0.852, p = 0.02).
Most, but not all, of the macroinvertebrate community
indices varied among streams and between
streams with and without gobies. The range of total
macroinvertebrate density was similar among the
goby-present and goby-absent streams (Table 2).
However, there was a significant goby-presence effect
on mean macroinvertebrate density (p < 0.001,
Table 3); goby presence explained 7% of the variability
in the data. Among-stream variability accounted
for 54% of the overall variability. Post-hoc
comparisons revealed three groups of streams with
significant differences between them (p < 0.0065).
Of these, Delaware and Little Canadaway (both
non-goby streams), were significantly different
from the others. Likewise, the density of non-
Diptera invertebrates was similar in goby-present
and goby-absent streams (Table 2), with significant
among-stream variability (p < 0.001, Table 3).
There was not a significant difference in the mean
density of non-Diptera macroinvertebrates * m–2 in
streams with or without round gobies (Table 3).
There was significant variability in macroinvertebrate
taxa richness among streams (p < 0.001, Table
3), but there was no significant difference in taxa
richness between goby-present and goby-absent
streams (Table 3). Streams with gobies present had,
on average, fewer taxa than streams without gobies
(Fig. 3). EPT richness and Shannon diversity values
both exhibited significant among-streams variability
(p < 0.001, Table 3) and significant differences
between streams with and without gobies. These
metrics were higher in streams without gobies relative
to streams with gobies (Fig. 3). Post-hoc comparisons
of Shannon diversity revealed just two
significantly different stream groupings, with Big
Sister (a goby-present stream) lower than all of the
other streams. The EPT richness post-hoc comparisons
resulted in three significantly different stream
groups (p < 0.0065), with Big Sister and Little Sister
creeks (both goby-present streams) having lower
EPT richness than the remaining streams. The
EPT/chironomid ratio was significantly lower in
streams with gobies relative to streams without gobies
(p = 0.023, Table 3; Fig. 3).
Walnut and Eighteen Mile creeks, on average,
showed significant changes in percent Chironomidae
and percent EPT from pre-goby invasion (1993)
to current (2005) conditions. Percent midges increased
roughly threefold in streams invaded by
round gobies (Fig. 4) and this was a significant increase
compared to the change observed in
Delaware and Silver creeks, which were not invaded
by gobies (Gadj = 11.88, df = 1, p < 0.001).
Percent EPT declined approximately threefold in
streams with gobies compared to streams without
gobies over the same time period (Fig. 4) and this
was a significant change (Gadj = 5.70, df = 1, p =
0.017). Neither taxa richness nor Shannon diversity
showed a significant change in streams with gobies
compared to streams without gobies (both p >
0.05), although over time, both richness and diversity
values were slightly higher in streams without
gobies relative to streams with gobies.
Round Goby Relationship to
Fish Communities
A total of 23 fish taxa was collected across all
streams (Table 4). Three species (smallmouth bass,
emerald shiner, and tadpole madtom) were found
only in streams that also held gobies, whereas seven
species (rock bass, mottled sculpin, spottail shiner,
an unidentified dace, creek chub, Johnny darter, and
rainbow darter) occurred only in streams without
gobies. Some fish community indices were correlated
with the environmental variables. Fish taxa
richness was negatively correlated with the conductivity
(r = –.825, p = 0.02, Table 2). The biomass
per unit effort (BPUE) rate was positively correlated
to water temperature and negatively correlated
with the percent of sand substrate (r = 0.755, p =
0.05; r = –0.890, p = 0.007, respectively).
There was no significant difference in the four
fish community metrics (i.e., taxa richness, Shannon
diversity, CPUE, and BPUE) between gobypresent
and goby-absent streams (all p > 0.0125).
However, all metrics were lower in streams containing
gobies compared to streams without gobies
(Table 5). Eighteen Mile Creek was excluded from
the analyses because electroshocking was not performed.
Historical NY DEC data indicated darter
species occurred in all eight streams sampled prior
to 1995. In the current collections, no Johnny
darters (Etheostoma nigrum Rafinesque) or rainbow
darters (E. caeruleum Storer) were collected from
any stream also containing round gobies. Rainbow
darters were collected in all the streams without go-
bies and Johnny darters were collected in Little
Canadaway Creek (Table 4).

xdiscussion
No studies have focused on the effects of round
gobies on tributary stream macroinvertebrate and
fish communities, although several distribution and
diet studies exist (Philips et al. 2003, Weimer 2003,
Carman et al. 2006, Lederer et al. 2006). Round gobies
occurred in four of the eight tributary streams
sampled and represented between 22% and 80% of
the total fish abundance in these streams. These results
are similar to the work of Phillips et al. (2003)
who found gobies in four of six Pennsylvania
streams, but abundances in the Pennsylvania
streams only accounted for ~13–30% of the total
fish catch. The similarities in presence among
streams might indicate that the tributary systems in
these neighboring states have been experiencing
round goby invasions for comparable time periods.
In three of the New York streams (Big Sister, Little
Sister, and Walnut), round goby relative abundances
were higher than in the Pennsylvania streams, representing
80%, 50%, and 54% of the catch, respectively.
Possibly, habitat suitability contributed to the
high relative abundances in these streams compared
to abundance values in PA. Several of the Pennsylvania
streams had high bedrock occurrence in their
lower reaches that may be unsuitable goby habitat,
at least at high fish densities (Phillips et al. 2003).
Bedrock occurrence was least in the three NY
streams with the highest goby abundance. Overall
fish community structure also was, in part, dictated
by bedrock occurrence.
In our ordination procedure, only a single axis
provided explanatory power for fish community
structure. Communities were related to variables
describing stream size (e.g., maximum depth, discharge,
percent occurrence of bedrock) and, in general,
fish communities grouped into species
associated with small bedrock streams or larger,
cobble-dominated streams with gobies found in the
latter. However, this ordination needs cautious interpretation
because only ten fish species occurred
with enough frequency among the streams to be included
in the analysis.
The fish community indices from goby-present
streams did not differ from those of the goby-absent
streams, although all the indices (fish taxa richness,
Shannon diversity, CPUE, and BPUE) were higher
in streams lacking round gobies. Gobies certainly
have not occupied tributary streams as long as they
have occupied the Great Lakes, so their impacts
still may be in the early stages and more pronounced
impacts may occur in the future. Alternatively,
our ability to detect significant differences
between fish community metrics in streams with
and without gobies may be limited by our small
sample size and the tendency of metrics to collapse
community variability. The reciprocal transfer of
energy and nutrients between streams and their
watersheds suggests that invasive fish may have
impacts which extend beyond the shoreline (Townsend
1996). For example, Baxter et al. (2004)
demonstrated that the invasion of rainbow trout (O.
mykiss) into streams of Japan affected many aspects
of stream ecosystem functioning. Rainbow trout directly
competed with Dolly Varden char (Salvelinus
malma) for macroinvertebrates, causing Dolly Varden
to shift their diets to include more benthic
invertebrates. The reduction of benthic macroinvertebrates
indirectly led to an increase in algal biomass.
Rainbow trout also reduced the amount of
macroinvertebrates emerging from the stream, leading
to a decline in riparian spiders in the nearby forest
(Baxter et al. 2004). Similarly, energy and
nutrient export from streams in New Zealand have
been altered as a result of invasive fish (Townsend
1996). We are currently investigating energy consumption
patterns by round gobies in tributary
streams and hypothesize that ultimately gobies may
have impacts in Great Lake tributary streams as significant
as those they have had in lakes. As gobies
become more prominent in tributary streams, similar
to the lakes, their aggressive nature and wide
diet breadth may allow them to outcompete native
fishes for food as well as nesting sites.
Several studies within the Great Lakes have documented
round gobies outcompeting other native,
benthic fishes, such as logperch, sculpins, and
darters (e.g., Dubs and Corkum 1996, Balshine et
al. 2005). In this study, rainbow and Johnny darters
were not found in any of the streams containing the
round goby, whereas they were found in all of the
goby-absent streams. Based on historical data, all
eight of the streams sampled in this study normally
harbor darters, but especially rainbow darters (J.
Evans, pers. comm., NYDEC 2007). Thus, we may
be witnessing the early stages of benthic fish
species displacement by round gobies. Additionally,
logperch (Percina caprodes, Rafinesque) were
found in two of the goby-present streams (Eighteen
Mile and Walnut creeks), whereas historically they
were found in all four streams currently containing
gobies. They also occurred in two of the four nongoby
streams both historically and in the current
collection. Collectively, these data suggest that
round gobies may be displacing other small, benthic
species, even though overall fish richness has not
been altered. Perhaps the absence or reduction of
benthic species, like darters, enables other species
like minnows, shiners, and suckers to move in and
inhabit these streams.
Most macroinvertebrate community indices were
different in streams with or without round gobies.
EPT taxa richness, Shannon diversity, and EPT/chironomid
ratios were lower in goby-present streams
compared to streams lacking gobies, whereas total
macroinvertebrate density was higher. Collectively,
these data suggest gobies have impacted EPT
species the most and this has subsequently led to a
dominance by chironomids. Goby diets vary with
body size, but smaller fish (< 7 cm TL) have been
found to prey upon a variety of benthic invertebrates
in both lake and stream studies (Kuhns and
Berg 1999, French and Jude 2001, Philips et al.
2003, Weimer 2003, Carman et al. 2006, Lederer et
al. 2006). Although dreissenid mussels are the main
diet item of adult round gobies (> 7 cm TL) in the
Great Lakes (Jude et al. 1995, French and Jude
2001), other prey, particularly insect larvae, dominate
diets in tributary streams due to the absence of
these mussels. Because many native stream fishes,
such as dace, darters, logperch, and sculpins, prey
upon macroinvertebrates, changes in the commu-
nity structure of macroinvertebrates may have detrimental
effects on these native fishes.
A closer examination of the macroinvertebrate
community data reveals some patterns of occurrence
which suggest round gobies may be having
further impacts in these tributary streams. Streams
without gobies had nearly twice as many mayfly
taxa as streams with gobies (n = 11 and 6, respectively).
The mayfly taxa missing from the goby
streams (Ephemera, Choroterpes, Paraleptophlebia,
and Isonychia) are primarily grazers and
filter-feeders and at least three taxa potentially
would be exposed on rock surfaces available to
goby predation. The net-spinning caddisflies
(Cheumatopsyche, Hydropsyche, and Polycentropus)
were about 2.5 times more abundant in
streams without gobies compared to streams with
gobies. Previous work by Carman et al. (2006)
showed round gobies in the Flint River consumed
significant numbers of hydropsychid caddisfly larvae.
Our ordination data showed that of the netspinning
caddisflies, only Hydropsyche abundance
was strongly related to the resultant axes and presumably
was affected by stream velocity patterns
since flow is necessary for the functioning of their
capture nets. Neither Cheumatopsyche nor Polycentropus
abundance was strongly related to the resultant
ordination axes (i.e., they occur near the
centroid) and they were found in seven of the eight
streams sampled. Thus, these two genera appear
less strongly driven by environmental conditions
relative to Hydropsyche. Only a single specimen of
Polycentropus was collected from a goby-present
stream, whereas it was present in three non-goby
streams and fairly abundant in two of them. The reduced
abundance of these common caddisfly taxa in
streams with gobies compared to streams without
gobies probably accounts for the significant EPT
and EPT/Chironomidae ratio evident in our survey
data. Additional support for this hypothesis is found
in comparing pre-goby invasion and current
macroinvertebrate data. Compared with pre-goby
invasion macroinvertebrate data, the current percent
EPT was lower in streams with round gobies and
the percent Chironomidae was higher. These results
suggest that streams invaded by round gobies have
experienced a reduction in mayfly/stonefly/caddisfly
abundance with a resultant dominance by
midges, while the relative abundance of these
groups has not changed appreciably in streams
lacking gobies.
Our study has documented not only the presence
of gobies within some of the tributary streams of
Lake Erie, but also a range of impacts on the fish
and macroinvertebrate communities. In general,
these tributary streams do not appear immune to
round goby invasion, as Cooper et al. (2007) suggest
for coastal Great Lake wetlands. The ability of
the round goby to adapt to a variety of habitats and
environmental conditions poses a threat to inland
lakes and river systems. Further knowledge about
the seasonal and long-term movement of gobies
within streams, rather than just presence, is needed
to better understand their use and potential impacts
on tributary streams. If gobies are able to use the
tributary streams as travel corridors, inland water
bodies may be the next sites for round goby range
expansion.