xabstract
The round goby (Neogobius melanostomus Pallas), a fish native to eastern Europe,
recently has become established in southwestern Lake Michigan. Because round gobies prey on zebra
mussels (Dreissena polymorpha Pallas) and other benthic invertebrates, the effects of round gobies on
invertebrates within zebra mussel colonies was investigated. Using a 2 × 3 factorial design, the effects of
round gobies (present or absent) and zebra mussel densities (zero, low, and high) on non-mussel invertebrates
was examined. Ten ceramic tiles of each mussel density were colonized in the laboratory and then
anchored in Calumet Harbor, IL for 10 weeks. Round gobies had access to half the tiles while half were
covered with coarse mesh screening that excluded round gobies, but allowed invertebrates to move into
and out of the exclosures. Low and high zebra mussel density tiles supported significantly greater numbers
of non-mussel invertebrates (p < 0.001) than zero density tiles, particularly amphipods (p < 0.001),
hydroptilid caddisflies (p < 0.05), isopods (p < 0.05), and chironomids (p < 0.001). Chlorophyll a concentrations
were highest (p < 0.001) at low zebra mussel densities. The presence of round gobies significantly
reduced densities of total non-mussel invertebrates (p < 0.01) and leptocerid caddisflies (p <
0.05), resulting in a significant increase in chlorophyll a (p < 0.01) concentrations. A significant zebra
mussel density x round goby interaction showed that total invertebrate biomass responded positively to
the combined effect of high zebra mussel density and round goby absence. These results demonstrate that
round gobies and zebra mussels are altering benthic invertebrate community structure and algal
resources in nearshore rocky areas of southwestern Lake Michigan.

xintroduction
The repeated introduction and spread of exotic organisms
in the Laurentian Great Lakes can have profound
impacts on benthic physical structure and
energy flow in aquatic ecosystems (Stewart and
Haynes 1994). Two recent invaders into the Great
Lakes that are impacting southern Lake Michigan
are the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha Pallas)
and the round goby (Neogobius melanostomus Pallas),
both of which are indigenous to the Black,
Azov, and Caspian seas.
Zebra mussels were introduced into Lake St. Clair
in 1986 and have spread rapidly across the Laurentian
Great Lakes. Densities as high as 342,000/m2
have been reported from areas with suitable substrates
(MacIsaac 1994). The establishment of zebra
mussels in the Great Lakes has coincided with increases
in depth of light penetration and benthic
algal biovolume and decreases in phytoplankton
populations (Lowe and Pillsbury 1995, MacIsaac
1996). These changes in energy flow from primarily
pelagic to benthic may influence benthic algal food
resources and benthic invertebrate community structure
(Stewart and Haynes 1994, Karatayev et al.
1997, Ricciardi et al. 1997, Stewart et al. 1998).
Round gobies were first discovered in the St. Clair
River in 1990 (Jude et al. 1992) and have been reported
from all five of the Laurentian Great Lakes
(Charlebois et al. 1997). Mollusks represent a major
component of round goby diets in both their North
American and native habitats (Jude et al. 1992, Kovtun
et al. 1974). In the Great Lakes, zebra mussels
comprise up to 82% of the diet of round gobies 80 to
90 mm TL (Jude et al. 1995). Although gut analysis
studies have provided information on round goby
diets in the Great Lakes (Ghedotti et al. 1995, Jude
et al. 1995), few data are available on how round
goby predation impacts benthic communities. Round
goby predation on zebra mussels may have important
implications for other benthic invertebrates living
in association with zebra mussel colonies. To
determine the impacts of round gobies and zebra
mussels on nearshore invertebrate communities in
Lake Michigan, responses of benthic invertebrates to
zebra mussel colonies of differing sizes and round
goby presence or absence were examined.
The overall objective of this study was to examine
the effects of zebra mussel density and round goby
predation on invertebrates associated with zebra
mussel colonies. Specifically, the goals were to determine
1) the effects of zebra mussel colony density
on invertebrates within the colony, 2) the effects of
round goby predation on non-mussel benthic invertebrates,
and 3) whether the effects of zebra mussel
density altered the response of benthic invertebrates
to round goby predation.

xmethods
STUDY AREA
This study was conducted in Calumet Harbor, Illinois,
U.S.A. (latitude = 41°43′37″N; longitude =
87°31′48″W) in southwestern Lake Michigan on the
Illinois/Indiana border. The study site was approximately
4 m from shore in a depth 3 m. This area of
Calumet Harbor is characterized by large cobble and
boulder substrata with dense zebra mussel
(40,000/m2) and round goby (15/m2) populations.
Experimental Design
Zebra Mussel Density Effects
To determine the effect of zebra mussel density on
benthic invertebrates, three densities of zebra mussels
(zero = 0/100 cm2; low = 100/100 cm2; high =
1,000/100 cm2) corresponding to 0, 10,000, and
100,000/m2 were colonized in the laboratory on
10 × 10 cm unglazed ceramic tiles attached to bricks
with silicone caulk. A square piece of plastic mesh
(mesh opening = 5 × 8 mm) was attached to each tile
to facilitate zebra mussel attachment. Prior to zebra
mussel colonization, a wire support frame for cages
was attached to each tile with silicone caulk. Zebra
mussels were collected from Calumet Harbor and
sorted into three size classes. Each tile was colonized
with 50% small mussels (3.0 to 7.9 mm), 45%
medium-sized mussels (8.0 to 10.9 mm), and 5%
large mussels (11.0 to 15.0 mm). These ratios reflected
the size structure of zebra mussels in
Calumet Harbor at the time of the experiment. Treatment
densities were achieved in the laboratory by
placing tiles in tanks with recirculating water and inoculating
the tiles with the appropriate number of
zebra mussels. Tiles remained in the tanks for three
weeks to allow zebra mussels to attach. During the
3-week period, zebra mussels that had migrated off
the tiles were replaced with mussels of the appropriate
size. Zebra mussels were fed a mixed algal assemblage
from a laboratory culture three times
weekly during the colonization period.
Round Goby Predation Effects
After the third week of colonization in the laboratory,
cages were constructed around the sides of the
experimental tiles to either exclude round gobies or
allow for round goby predation. Round goby exclusion
cages enclosed all four sides of the tile, whereas
one side of round goby predation cages was left open
to allow round gobies access to the tiles. Cages were
constructed from plastic mesh screening (mesh
opening = 5 × 8 mm) in the shape of a four-sided
pyramid and were added to each tile immediately before
placement in the lake. The mesh size allowed
free movement of non-mussel invertebrates into and
out of the cages.
Five replicates of each treatment (5 replicates × 3
zebra mussel densities × 2 round goby treatments =
30 tiles) were placed randomly along a transect line
parallel to the shore. In addition, the open side of
each round goby predation cage was oriented randomly.
The experiment was conducted for 10 weeks
in 1995 (11 July to 18 September). Divers using
SCUBA observed round gobies feeding in predation
cages on several occasions during day and night, but
no other fish were seen in the cages. Crayfish (Orconectes
rusticus Girard) were abundant in the cobble
at the study site, but were not observed using the
cages. Cages were examined twice weekly to remove
algae that could have interfered with water flow and
to check for disturbance. All tiles remained intact
during the experiment. At the completion of the experiment,
tiles were collected by divers using
SCUBA and placed into individual plastic Ziploc®
bags. Bags were brought to the surface and placed in
coolers for transport to the laboratory.
In the laboratory chlorophyll a samples were collected
by scraping 25% of the surface area of each
tile, including any zebra mussels or other invertebrates.
Chlorophyll a concentrations were determined
spectrophotometrically using methanol
extraction and phaeophytin corrections according to
Standard Methods (APHA 1985). Invertebrates were
removed from the remaining surface area of each tile
and preserved in 80% ethanol for later identification
and enumeration. All invertebrates collected were
identified to genus using Merritt and Cummins
(1996) or Thorp and Covich (1991). Dry weight of
each taxon, excluding chironomids, was obtained by
air-drying at room temperature for 24 hours. Biomass
of chironomids was estimated at the subfamily
level using the regression equations of Smock
(1980). Total invertebrate density and chlorophyll a
data were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA with
replication (2 × 3 factorial design: 2 levels of round
goby predation × 3 levels of zebra mussel density).
Significant zebra mussel density effects were analyzed
using Tukey’s multiple comparison tests. Responses
of individual taxa to zebra mussel densities
were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA and
Tukey’s multiple comparison tests. Chlorophyll a
and invertebrate density data, excluding total chironomid
density, were log transformed to meet homoscedasticity
and normality assumptions. Total
chironomid density data required no transformation.
A test significance level of p < 0.05 was used in all
analyses.

xresults
To determine if differences in zebra mussel densities
were maintained on experimental tiles during the
experiment, the number of live zebra mussels remaining
in round goby exclosures at the completion
of the experiment was analyzed using a one-way
ANOVA on log-transformed densities. All three
zebra mussel density treatments remained significantly
different after the 10 week experiment (F =
203.8; 2, 12 df, p < 0.001).
Zebra Mussel Effects
A total of 20 genera of non-mussel invertebrates
were collected from the experimental tiles (Table 1).
All invertebrate densities are expressed as mean/100
cm2 (±SE). Density of total non-mussel invertebrates
was 3 to 4 times greater on high and low
zebra mussel density tiles than on zero density tiles
(Table 2). The total number of Chironomidae
(Diptera) also was significantly greater in the presence
of zebra mussels than when zebra mussels
were absent (Table 2).
The response of total invertebrate densities
among zebra mussel density treatments, especially
between low and high treatments, may have been
masked by the high contribution of chironomids
(54% of total non-mussel invertebrates) to densities
of total non-mussel invertebrates. Thus, data on
total non-mussel invertebrates exclusive of chironomids
also were analyzed. Excluding chironomids revealed
a significant positive response of total
non-mussel invertebrates to zebra mussel densities
(Table 2). Non-mussel invertebrate densities were
greater on high density treatments than on low and
zero density tiles. Invertebrate densities on low
zebra mussel density treatments also were significantly
greater than in the absence of zebra mussels
(Table 2).
Of the 20 genera collected in this study, 16 responded
positively to higher zebra mussel densities
(Table 1), although responses of only six taxa were
statistically significant. Densities of Caecidotea sp.
(Isopoda) on high zebra mussel density treatments
were significantly greater than on zero zebra mussel
tiles, although high and low zebra mussel density
treatments did not differ (Table 2). The hydroptilid
caddisfly Agraylea sp. (Trichoptera) had significantly
greater densities in the presence of zebra
mussels than on zero zebra mussel density treatments
(Table 2). Densities of Gammarus sp. on
high zebra mussel density tiles were significantly
greater than on low or zero zebra mussel treatments
(Table 2).
Densities of the most common chironomid genera,
Cricotopus sp., Paratanytarsus sp., and Psectrocladius
sp., also responded to zebra mussel
densities. Densities of Cricotopus sp. were significantly
greater on low zebra mussel density tiles than
on zero density tiles (Table 2). Densities on high
density tiles, however, did not differ from those on
either low or zero zebra mussel treatments.
Paratanytarsus sp. and Psectrocladius sp. responded
similarly with increased densities in the
presence of zebra mussels. Paratanytarsus sp. densities
were significantly greater on high and low
zebra mussel tiles than on zero zebra mussel treatments
(Table 2). Similarly, Psectrocladius sp. densities
were significantly greater in the presence of
zebra mussels than on zero zebra mussel treatments
(Table 2).
Round Goby Effects
Zebra mussel densities on high density tiles were
significantly reduced in the presence of round gobies
compared to round goby exclosure tiles (F = 14.6;
1, 24 df, p < 0.01). Round gobies had no effect, however,
on zebra mussel densities in low or zero density
treatments (p > 0.05).
Total non-mussel invertebrate densities were 44%
higher on round goby exclosure tiles than on tiles allowing
round goby access (Table 3). Removing chironomids
from the analysis revealed a 92% increase
in non-mussel invertebrate densities on round goby
exclosure tiles (Table 3). Round gobies had no effect
on total chironomid densities (Table 3).
The only individual taxon significantly affected by
round goby presence was the predatory caddisfly,
Oecetis (Trichoptera). Densities of Oecetis were six
times greater in round goby exclosures compared to
treatments allowing round gobies access (Table 3).
Densities of most taxa also were lower in the presence
of round gobies, although differences were not
statistically significant (Table 1).
Zebra Mussel and Round Goby Effects on
Invertebrate Biomass
The influence of each main effect, zebra mussel
density and round goby presence, on total non-mussel
invertebrate biomass could not be determined because
of a significant statistical interaction (F = 7.5;
2, 24 df, p < 0.01). Total non-mussel invertebrate
biomass, however, exhibited a positive response to
the combined effects of high zebra mussel density
and round goby absence (Fig. 1).
Zebra Mussel and Round Goby Effects on Algae
Chlorophyll a concentrations (mg/100 cm2 ± SE)
on tiles were quantified to examine possible indirect
effects of zebra mussels or round gobies on food
availability for algivorous benthic invertebrates. It
should be noted that chlorophyll a values reflect
concentrations on both experimental tiles and zebra
mussel shells.
Chlorophyll a was influenced by both zebra mussel
density and round goby presence. Chlorophyll a
concentrations were two-fold greater at low zebra
mussel densities (19.6 ±1.4) than on the zero (9.0 ±
1.7) and high (9.5 ± 1.5) zebra mussel density treatments
(F = 20.9; 2, 24 df, p < 0.001, Fig. 2a).
Chlorophyll a concentrations in the presence of
round gobies (15.4 ± 1.8) were 50% greater than in
round goby exclosures (10.1 ± 1.5) (F = 11.9; 1, 24
df, p < 0.01, Fig. 2b).

xdiscussion
Zebra Mussel Density Effects
Results from the present study on experimental
tiles in rocky areas of nearshore Lake Michigan
show that densities of most non-mussel benthic invertebrates
had a positive response to zebra mussels.
In contrast, Dermott and Kerec (1997) and Nalepa et
al. (1998) reported reductions of some benthic invertebrates
in soft sediments of Lake Erie and Lake
Michigan, respectively, since the invasion of zebra
mussels. The results from this study are consistent
with previous studies that have reported increases in
non-mussel invertebrate abundance in the presence
of zebra mussels (Dermott et al. 1993, Griffiths
1993, Stewart and Haynes 1994, Wisenden and Bailey
1995, Botts et al. 1996, Stewart et al. 1998). The
mechanism responsible for these increases varies
among taxa and may result from additional substrate
complexity caused by zebra mussel shells and
colony formation, and/or an elevation in the rate of
organic matter deposition to the benthos from fecal
and pseudofecal production of zebra mussels
(Izvekova and Lvova-Katchanova 1992, Botts et al.
1996, Ricciardi et al. 1997, Thayer et al. 1997,
Stewart et al. 1998).
Round Goby Effects
Round goby diets have been examined in both laboratory
and field studies (Ghedotti et al. 1995, Jude
et al. 1995, Ray and Corkum 1997). Although differences
in prey species composition exist between the
native habitat of the round goby and in the Great
Lakes, diet composition of round gobies in both
habitats has been reported to be similar (Jude et al.
1992, Kovtun et al. 1974). Jude et al. (1995) reported
that diets of small round gobies (< 67 mm)
were composed primarily of amphipods, isopods,
chironomids, and benthic cladocerans. At sizes > 67
mm, however, round gobies had a more specialized
diet ingesting primarily zebra mussels. Ray and
Corkum (1997) reported similar ontogenetic diet differences
where small round gobies (< 70 mm) ate
few zebra mussels and larger round gobies (≥ 70
mm) relied heavily on zebra mussels. Stomach con-
tent analyses of round gobies from the study site
support the results from these previous studies.
These observations are consistent with a laboratory
feeding study of large gobies (60 to 100 mm) that reported
a strong preference for zebra mussels over native
clams or snails (Ghedotti et al. 1995). Despite
field and laboratory studies on round goby diets and
food preferences, no studies have addressed how the
presence of the round goby will affect benthic invertebrate
community structure in the Great Lakes.
In the present study, total invertebrate densities in
zebra mussel colonies significantly decreased in the
presence of round gobies. The most likely explanation
for this reduction is round goby predation, although
indirect effects of round gobies altering zebra
mussel colonies can not be discounted. Many studies
have shown decreases in benthic invertebrate density
either through direct or indirect effects of fish predation
(Gilinsky 1984, Harvey and Hill 1991, Hershey
1985). In the present study, round gobies significantly
reduced zebra mussels in high density treatments,
suggesting that indirect predation effects may
play a role in determining invertebrate densities. Although
crayfish (Orconectes rusticus) were present
at the study site and have been reported to feed on
zebra mussels (Martin and Corkum 1994, Perry et al.
1997), they were never observed on the round goby
access tiles. Similarly, smallmouth bass (Micropterus
dolomieui Lacépède) also were present at
the study site, but were not observed feeding in or
around the experimental tiles.
Although cageless controls were not used in this
study, these results accurately reflect the effects of
round gobies on nearshore benthic invertebrates.
Cageless controls would have allowed examination
of possible cage effects on round goby feeding behavior
and invertebrate colonization and densities.
Lower invertebrate densities on round goby access
tiles did not result from higher densities of round gobies
than in the surrounding area because natural
rock shelter areas and zebra mussels were abundant
at the study site. In addition, if the plastic mesh surrounding
round goby exclusion cages had hampered
invertebrate colonization, invertebrate densities
would be expected to be lower in those treatments.
On the contrary, total invertebrate densities were significantly
higher on round goby exclosure tiles. A
possible cage effect could have resulted in reduced
zebra mussel densities in round goby access cages
by wave action dislodging and removing zebra mussels.
Because no dislodged zebra mussels were observed
in round goby exclusion cages, it is unlikely
that dislodgment in round goby access cages could
account for reduced zebra mussel densities.
Community Responses
Zebra mussel colonization adds structural complexity
to benthic substrata and channels nutrients to
benthic invertebrates via fecal and pseudofecal production
(Stanåczykowska and Lewandowski 1993,
Lowe and Pillsbury 1995, Botts et al. 1996, Stewart
et al. 1998). When zebra mussel densities are high,
increased structural complexity and nutrient inputs
provide refugia and food resources for invertebrates,
respectively. Many of the invertebrates identified in
this study are classified as shredders, scrapers, and
collector-gatherers (Table 1) (Thorp and Covich
1991, Merritt and Cummins 1996). These invertebrates
are all potentially algivorous, and likely reduced
chlorophyll a in high zebra mussel density
treatments. The net result is that chlorophyll a levels
in high zebra mussel density colonies and concomitant
high grazer densities are similar to those without
zebra mussels and hence no nutrient enrichment
from mussel feces and pseudofeces. Thus, the low
zebra mussel density treatments exhibited the highest
chlorophyll a concentrations.
Chlorophyll a on experimental tiles was significantly
higher in the presence of round gobies. This is
likely because of round goby predation on grazing
invertebrates, thereby releasing algae from grazing
pressure. When round gobies were excluded, however,
invertebrate numbers were significantly higher
(50%), resulting in lower chlorophyll a concentrations.
These results are consistent with previous
studies that have reported indirect effects of predators
on algal communities by altering herbivore assemblages
(McCormick 1990, Bechara et al. 1992,
Brönmark et al. 1992, Power 1992, Wootton, 1992,
McCollum et al. 1998).
The invasion of round gobies and zebra mussels
into Lake Michigan has the potential to change food
web dynamics of benthic communities in nearshore
rocky areas. Although the design of this study did
not allow distinguishing between direct and indirect
effects, these results can be used to develop a conceptual
model of littoral zone interactions in southern
Lake Michigan that illustrates possible direct and
indirect effects of round gobies and zebra mussels on
benthic communities. A series of complex interactions
between round gobies, zebra mussels, and benthic
invertebrates can directly and indirectly affect
food resources and energy flow, thereby altering the
structure and function of littoral zone communities
in nearshore areas of Lake Michigan and other Laurentian
Great Lakes.