xabstract
1. Aquaculture in arid Patagonia is potentially affecting the hooded grebe (Podiceps gallardoi), a critically endangered endemic waterbird. Exotic rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) were stocked from 1994 in naturally fishless lakes, the primary reproductive habitat of this grebe.
2. Trout and grebes are visual predators, whose diets overlap. Consequently, trout could reduce the abundance of prey of the hooded grebe.
3. This study compared the size distribution and abundance of the pelagic zooplankton fraction preyed upon by trout in four fishless lakes and three lakes stocked with trout, including vegetated and unvegetated lakes.
4. The mean size of Daphnia spp. was 45% and 35% larger in fishless lakes than in stocked lakes, for unvegetated and vegetated lakes, respectively. Boeckella spp. were larger in fishless than in stocked vegetated lakes.
5. Fishless and stocked lakes had highly contrasting biomasses of large pelagic crustaceans. Amphipods were absent from the water column of all stocked lakes analysed, and were abundant in fishless lakes. Parabroteas sarsi was absent from the two large unvegetated lakes, stocked with trout.
6. These shifts in the abundance and size spectrum of the zooplankton may reflect competition between trout and hooded grebe, affecting the survival of the latter species.
7. The current conservation status of this rare aquatic bird demands the application of management tools to reduce the detrimental effects of aquaculture on their primary reproductive habitat.

xintroduction

The hooded grebe (Podiceps gallardoi), a diving waterbird endemic to southern Patagonia, lives in cold lakes of this region (Fjeldså, 1984). It breeds in only a few remote basaltic plateaux of Santa Cruz Province, Argentina (Lancelotti et al., 2009a; Roesler et al., 2012). These plateaux collectively hold more than a thousand fishless lakes, including the largest lakes of this arid region. The hooded grebe population was estimated to be 800 individuals in 2010, more than an 80% decline from estimates in the 1980s (Roesler et al., 2012), making it one of the more threatened species in Argentina (Chebez, 2008), as well as globally (Birdlife International, 2015).
More than 40 naturally fishless lakes of the basaltic plateaux were stocked with rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) for aquaculture from 1994 (Lancelotti et al., 2010b). This has generated concerns about potential adverse effects on the grebe’s habitat (Roesler et al., 2011). The introduction of trout was proposed as one of the main causes for the declining grebe population (Roesler et al., 2012). Aquaculture is largely concentrated in Strobel Lake plateau, the historic core of the reproductive habitat of hooded grebe (Fjeldså, 1986; Beltrán et al., 1992). This plateau experienced the most drastic decline in the abundance of hooded grebe (Roesler et al., 2012).
Two breeding lakes for hooded grebe in the Strobel Lake plateau were stocked. Islote Lake (>7 km2) was the most important with more than 1000 mature individuals (20–30% of the estimated global population) in a single colony (Beltrán et al., 1992). After fish stocking in 2003, a maximum of 16 mature individuals and no breeding colony were recorded (personal observation). In Ocho Lake (0.2 km2), a colony of 81 individuals (40 nests) bred in 2004 (Lancelotti, 2009), but no colonies were recorded 4 years after trout introduction (personal observation). Trout may be reducing habitat suitability for hooded grebe.
Introduced fish have changed the composition and abundance of species, nutrient availability, nutrient cycling, primary productivity, trophic relationships, and behaviour and spatial distribution of prey
species in freshwater ecosystems around the world (Mallory et al., 1994; Scheffer, 1998; Knapp and Matthews, 2001; Schindler and Parker, 2001). Such effects are most dramatic in lakes devoid of native fish (Mallory et al., 1994; Donald et al., 2001; Vredenburg, 2004), such as lakes of the basaltic plateaux of Patagonia. Fish introductions can initiate trophic cascades (Carpenter and Kitchell, 1996), altering drastically the limnological characteristics of lakes (e.g. the quality and abundance of macrophytes; Lauridsen et al., 1994), and reducing habitat for waterbirds (Hornung and Foote, 2006).
Introduced exotic fish and translocation of native fish in lakes of the Patagonian steppe have caused local extinctions of cladoceran species, reduction of zooplankton size, and community homogenization (Modenutti and Balseiro, 1994; Reissig et al., 2006). In the shallow lake Laguna Blanca, stocked fish caused the local extinction of amphibians, reduced significantly the abundance of crustaceans, increased turbidity, induced a decline of macrophytes, and ultimately caused a drastic diminution of waterbird abundance (Ortubay et al., 2006). Despite this, the direct effects of trout are unclear, with confounding effects of native and exotic introduced fish species. Lakes of the Strobel Lake plateau are naturally fishless, and only rainbow trout were stocked, providing an exceptional opportunity to investigate the trophic role of trout and their effects.
Trout and grebes are visual predators with potentially overlapping diets. They feed on similar- sized species, mostly crustaceans (amphipods, copepods and cladocerans), snails, and insects (coleopterans and chironomids) (Fjeldså, 1986; Lancelotti, 2009). Prey abundance is an important factor determining the success of hooded grebe (Fjeldså, 1986).
Most (>95%) of the trout diet (n>400) is composed of pelagic crustaceans, dominated by amphipods (Hyalella spp.), and secondarily cladocerans (Daphnia spp.) and copepods (Boeckella spp.) (Bandieri, 2011, and Julio Lancelotti unpublished data). Changes in this pelagic community may indicate altered food webs. Trout could affect the quantity of pelagic, benthic, and littoral prey on which hooded grebe rely to survive and reproduce.
The size distribution and abundance of the pelagic zooplankton preyed on by trout in fishless and stocked lakes were compared in the Strobel Lake plateau, indicating alterations to the food webs caused by trout introduction. The results were used to assess the consequences for conservation of the critically endangered hooded grebe.

xmethods
STUDY AREA
The Strobel Lake plateau is located in the central-west portion of Santa Cruz province (72° 0′ W, 48° 30′ S, 700–1200 m.a.s.l.), Argentina (Figure 1). It is one of the biggest basaltic plateaux of Patagonia (2500 km2), with 301–1244 lakes during extremely dry and wet periods, respectively, which are important for bird species richness (Imberti, 2005; Lancelotti et al., 2009b). Temperatures range between  19°C in winter and 28°C in summer, with frequent and strong winds throughout the year (mean annual speed 24 km h-1; Lancelotti, 2009). Water bodies range from large lakes (7 km2; <25 m depth) to small temporary ponds (0.005 km2, <1 m depth). Lakes vary in water turbidity, macrophyte cover, and physico-chemical properties (Lancelotti et al., 2009b). There are four main types of lakes (Lancelotti et al., 2009b): turbid lakes have high conductivity (>2000 μS cm-1) and
turbidity (Secchi depth <0.5 m), varying in size from 9–27 ha and less than 3 m deep. The three remaining groups all have clear water, but differ in their macrophyte cover, depending on size and bathymetry. Small vegetated lakes (<9 ha and <2 m deep) are fully vegetated, while the other two groups comprise larger lakes (>7 ha and 3–16 m deep), either heavily vegetated (large vegetated lakes (V), 15–30% emergent macrophyte cover), or sparsely vegetated (large unvegetated lakes (U), <15% emergent macrophyte cover).
The aquatic invertebrate communities of Strobel Lake plateau have relatively low species richness. Pelagic invertebrates are represented largely by crustaceans, dominated by calanoid copepods (Boeckella and Parabroteas sarsi), and cladocerans (mostly Daphnia spp.). Eight species of calanoid copepods occur in Strobel Lake plateau, but no more than three species are numerically dominant (Lancelotti, 2009). Benthic organisms are primarily represented by Oligochaeta, chironomid larvae, Hirudinea and Gastropoda, although the last of these are not present in all lakes. The distribution of snails is patchy, and absent from lakes in this study. Hyalella represent the only genus of amphipods inhabiting Strobel Lake plateau (Lancelotti, 2009). In vegetated lakes adult and larval coleopterans and larvae and pupae of chironomids are abundant
among macrophytes. No amphibians or native fish inhabit these lakes. Aquatic vertebrates are only represented by a rich waterbird community, with more than 20 species. Besides hooded grebe, the list of species includes two globally Near Threatened species, the magellanic plover (Pluvianellus socialis) and the Chilean flamingo (Phoenicopterus chilensis) (Lancelotti et al., 2009b).
Hooded grebe congregate to reproduce in highland lakes from mid-austral spring to early autumn, when they migrate to the Atlantic coast. They use relatively clear and shallow lakes, with a dense carpet of milfoil Myriophyllum elatinoides. Nests are built on mat-forming macrophytes, usually surrounded by open water, where grebes forage preferentially on snails, amphipods and insect larvae. These large food items are essential for successfully raising young (Erize, 1983; Fjeldså, 1986; Beltrán et al., 1992).
The extensive aquaculture in Strobel Lake plateau consists of stocking fry of rainbow trout (approximately 6000 individuals per km2) in medium sized lakes (0.05–0.71 km2, mean 0.19 km2), and harvesting the fish after 2–3 years, when they reach commercial size (fork length >20 cm). The harvested lakes are then re-stocked. Farmers prefer to stock large unvegetated lakes, where harvesting using gillnets is the easiest fishing method. However, in several of the large vegetated lakes, trout were also stocked. Small vegetated and turbid lakes remain fishless (Lancelotti et al., 2010a). Because of habitat restrictions (i.e. lack of permanent streams and adequate spawning beds), trout do not reproduce in most of the lakes of Strobel Lake plateau; therefore, trout populations are regulated by stocking and harvesting (Lancelotti et al., 2010b).
METHODS
Zooplankton samples were collected in seven lakes: two fishless and two stocked, large, unvegetated lakes in March 2013, and two fishless lakes and one stocked, large, vegetated lake in December 2014 (Table 1). Three vertical tows of the whole water column were made in each lake, with a 115 μm mesh zooplankton net. This mesh size captures organisms that match the prey size of trout and hooded grebe. Samples were fixed in situ with 4% formalin, and analysed in the laboratory with a stereoscopic microscope. Organisms were classified into four categories: Boeckella spp. (strongly dominated by Boeckella poppei and including Boeckella michaelseni), Parabroteas sarsi, Daphnia spp. (Daphnia dadayana, Daphnia commutata and Daphnia obtusa group), and Hyalella spp. Three subsamples of 20 mL were analysed for each sample by counting all individuals in the four categories.
The body length of 40 randomly selected Daphnia spp. was measured (distance from the top of the head to the base of the caudal spine) and Boeckella spp. (distance from the base of the first antennae to the tip of the furca). These two groups were present in all lakes, while amphipods and large copepods were absent in several stocked lakes and so were not measured. The size of Boeckella spp. and Daphnia spp. were compared between fishless and stocked lakes using MANOVA analysis. A square-root transformation was applied, normalizing data distributions, reflected in quantile–quantile plots (Timm, 2002). A nested model design was used to test the effect of individual lakes and status (fishless vs. stocked); interactions were not tested. Large vegetated lakes and large unvegetated lakes were similarly but separately analysed.
The biomass (mg L-1) of each category of organism was estimated by multiplying its abundance in samples by the mean individual mass from previous studies in the same lake system (Lancelotti, 2009), and length–weight relationships from literature (Pilati and Martínez, 2003). A principal component analysis (PCA) (Legendre and Legendre, 2003) tested the similarity of community assemblages between lakes. Variables included in the covariance matrix for the PCA were the biomass (g m-3) of Boeckella spp., Daphnia spp., P. sarsi, and Hyalella spp. Data were normalized with a square-root transformation, and all variables were standardized. Statistical analyses were conducted with R software (R Development Core Team, 2013).

xresults
There were significant differences in size of Boeckella spp. among large unvegetated lakes, although this was not related to whether they were fishless or stocked (Table 2, Figure 2), which contrasted fishless and stocked vegetated lakes with significantly different abundances of Boeckella spp. The opposite results were observed in large vegetated lakes for this group, with significant differences between fishless and stocked lakes, and no significant differences at the level of individual lakes. Daphnia spp. were consistently larger in fishless than in stocked vegetated and
unvegetated lakes, although there were differences among lakes (Table 2, Figure 2). Daphnia spp. were 45% and 35% larger in fishless lakes than in stocked lakes, respectively, for unvegetated and vegetated lakes (Figure 2).
Fishless and stocked lakes showed highly contrasting biomasses of large pelagic crustaceans (>1 mm; Figure 3). The most remarkable difference was the absence of Hyalella spp. in the water column of every stocked lake, and Parabroteas in the two large unvegetated stocked lakes. In contrast, these organisms contributed substantially to the biomass in fishless lakes (but Hyalella spp. in Rodeo 3). These differences in biomass between fishless and stocked lakes were not evident in the groups of smaller body size – Daphnia spp. and Boeckella spp. Their biomass was more variable among individual lakes than between fishless and stocked lakes or lake type (vegetated vs. unvegetated). For example, the stocked lake Potrero had similar biomass of Daphnia spp. to the two fishless lakes, whereas the stocked lake Campamento had similar biomass of Boeckella spp. to these fishless lakes (Figure 3). Moreover, the vegetated lakes, Rodeo 3, and Herradura (fishless and stocked respectively; Figure 3, lower panel), had similar biomass of Daphnia spp. and Boeckella spp.
With respect to community assemblages, Boeckella spp. explained most of the variability in the first principal component, whereas P. sarsi and Hyalella spp. explained most of the variability in the second principal component (Figure 4, Table 3). Fishless and stocked lakes were arranged in separate groups, explained mostly by the biomass of P. sarsi and Hyalella spp. The two large, fishless unvegetated lakes (Rodeo 1 and Rodeo 2) had high biomass of P. sarsi and Hyalella spp., respectively. However, Rodeo 1 also had a high abundance of Boeckella spp. The two large unvegetated stocked lakes (Potrero and Campamento) showed the opposite in terms of large crustacean biomass, whereas there was no clear pattern in the large vegetated lakes. The stocked Herradura Lake, characterized by its low crustacean biomass, represented the most atypical lake, with a community structure similar to the fishless vegetated lake Rodeo 3.

xdiscussion
Rainbow trout shaped the community of pelagic crustaceans, affecting species’ dominance and size structure. The most evident and drastic effect was the absence of large crustaceans (P. sarsi and Hyalella spp.) in stocked lakes. These probably represent the primary prey item of hooded grebes, affecting breeding success of this endangered species. The observed differences reflect trout predation. During early stages of aquaculture, amphipods represented more than 95% of the stomach content of rainbow trout, but their relative importance has decreased over time (Bandieri, 2011). Daphnia spp., which were occasionally preyed upon by trout during the early phases of aquaculture, became the primary prey after two or more cycles of trout stocking (Bandieri, 2011).
Trout also exert impacts on benthic and littoral communities by feeding on large coleopterans, chironomid larvae, and snails in the littoral zone. For example, chironomid larvae were the primary prey for trout where the abundance of crustaceans was low (Lancelotti et al., 2015). Furthermore, in Cardiel Lake (300 km2), at the base of the Strobel
Lake plateau, trout prey primarily on snails. This lake is depleted of crustaceans, probably as a direct effect of trout predation (Pascual et al., 2001). These changes in benthic and littoral communities may also be occurring in the Strobel Lake plateau.
The decrease in prey size and biomass may also affect bioenergetic costs, reproductive success, and fitness of the grebe. In addition, zooplankton grazing pressure on phytoplankton may be reduced by trout, with increasing nutrient recycling, promoting phytoplankton growth and potentially causing trophic cascades (Carpenter and Kitchell, 1996; Eby et al., 2006). A recent study in the Lake Strobel plateau found that stocked lakes have substantially higher levels of Cyanobacteria than fishless lakes (Izaguirre and Saad, 2014), indicating the occurrence of changes in the phytoplankton communities.
These processes may be more serious in vegetated lakes, where the abundance and quality of macrophytes can be affected, altering the suitability of these lakes as reproductive habitat for hooded grebes. Although aquaculture is concentrated in large unvegetated lakes (Lancelotti et al., 2010b), several large vegetated lakes were stocked. They are
likely to be used increasingly as the preferred non- vegetated lakes are stocked. This may exacerbate the spatial overlap between trout and hooded grebes (Lancelotti et al., 2010b).
Grebe species are particularly vulnerable to introductions of exotic fish. The introduction of fishes (mostly rainbow trout) threatens seven of the nine species of grebes of conservation concern listed by the IUCN (http://www.iucnredlist.org/), including two recently extinct species (Atitlán grebe Podilymbus gigas and Colombian grebe Podiceps andinus). In addition, gill nets used for fishing are among the main causes of grebe deaths worldwide (Fjeldså, 2004). Gill nets used in the Lake Strobel area are potential further threats to hooded grebes although little is known of their impact on mortality.
The critical status of hooded grebe demands actions focused on reducing the overlap between aquaculture and the habitat of this species. In 2014 the Patagonia National Park was created to protect primary reproductive areas of hooded grebes. However, habitats suitable for hooded grebe reproduction need to be conserved in their original fishless condition. It is also imperative to prevent fish harvesting overlapping with the presence of hooded grebe. There is an opportunity, too, to rehabilitate reproductive areas of hooded grebes, invaded by trout, by removing these fish and returning the lakes to a fishless status. These actions together could save this endangered species from the impacts of trout.
