xabstract
The consequences of introducing Cichla cf. monoculus Spix & Agassiz, Astronotus ocellatus (Agassiz)
and Pygocentrus nattereri Kner into lakes in the River Doce basin, Brazil, on richness, diversity and efficiency of
aquatic macrophytes as natural refugia to native fishes was investigated. Samples were taken from lakes with and
without alien fishes in areas with and without aquatic macrophytes. The presence of alien fishes reduced richness
and diversity of the native fish community. The refugia function, which could be attributed to the clustering of
aquatic macrophytes, does not exist in these lakes probably because the alien fishes exploit such habitats for
reproduction. Since introductions threaten the native fish diversity of the region, studies on regional dispersion and
factors that minimise the spread of alien fishes are needed.

xintroduction
Stimulated by increasing food production, generation
of economic benefits and recreation (Welcomme 1988),
the introduction of alien fishes has caused great
changes to the composition of fish fauna in many
lakes, e.g. Nile perch, Lates niloticus (L.) into Lake
Victoria in Africa (Ogutu-Ohwayo 1990). These introductions
modify local ecological conditions by altering
the reproduction, growth and development of native
species, as well as hybridisation and introducing
diseases and parasites.
In Brazil, fish translocation was common during the
1960s and 1970s, mainly from the Amazon Basin to the
north-east and south-east of the country (Agostinho,
Ju´ lio & Petrere 1994; Agostinho 1996; Agostinho &
Ju´ lio 1996). The Parque Estadual do Rio Doce, an
important reserve within the Atlantic Forest biome, is
located in the middle River Doce, southeastern Brazil.
The peacock cichlid, Cichla cf monoculus Spix &
Agassiz, oscar, Astronotus ocellatus (Agassiz), and
red piranha, Pygocentrus nattereri Kner, were introduced
into lakes neighbouring this Park, later reaching
the lakes within the reserve area (Sunaga & Verani
1985, 1987; Godinho & Formagio 1992). The introduction
of these species in lakes of the Park affected
the native fish community, causing the disappearance
of some species and a reduction in the abundance of
young individuals of others, coupled with reduction in
mean weight of these individuals (Sunaga & Verani
1991; Godinho, Fonseca & Arau´ jo 1994).
The effects of introducing these alien fishes into the
lakes of River Doce State Park and the effectiveness of
aquatic macrophytes as refugia for native fish species
from the alien species was examined. Six lakes were
sampled: three with alien fishes (experimental group)
and three without (control group) and the following
hypotheses were tested: (i) is there a decrease in the
native species richness and diversity between these two
groups of lakes as a function of the introductions? (ii)
do areas with larger heterogeneity (due to the presence
of macrophyte mats) serve as refugia for the native
species in lakes with the alien species? (iii) are there
changes in the total fish biomass and mean weight of
native species as a function in the presence of alien
species?
The hypothesis of differences in mean weight for
native populations is suggested as a measure of the
impact of alien species on certain native species, since
young individuals of the latter could serve as food for
the alien piscivorous species. Thus, a reduction in the
abundance of young individuals of the native species is
expected, which should result in an increase of the
mean weight of the individuals in these populations.

xmethods
Study area
This study was conducted at River Doce State Park,
located in the southeast of the State of Minas Gerais
(Fig. 1). The predominant vegetation is Atlantic
Forest, a biome that was regarded as the fourth most
important hotspot for biodiversity on earth, based on
endemism and the density of vertebrates and plants
(Myers, Mittermeier, Mittermeier, Fonseca & Kent
2000). The total park area is about 35 000 ha, with
altitudes varying between 236 and 515 m (Tundisi &
De Meis 1985). The climate is tropical hot and semihumid,
with a rainy season in the summer and a dry
season that lasts for 4–5 months in the winter. The
park is bound to the east by the River Doce and to the
northwest by the River Piracicaba. Some streams cross
the park flowing into the River Doce. About 50 lakes
make up its lacustrine system (Fig. 1), occupying 6%
of its area (Godinho 1996).
Three alien species occur in the lakes of the park: the
peacock cichlid, C. cf. monoculus, the oscar, A. ocellatus
and the red piranha, P. nattereri. The peacock cichlid is
a piscivorous species with a generalist diet (Keenleyside
1991). Once introduced, this species has great
potential to cause damage to the native fish communities
(Fontenele & Peixoto 1979; Welcomme 1988).
The oscar is also a cichlid fish, with an omnivorous
diet, feeding on fruits, insects, crustaceans and small
fish. This species displays parental care and is territorial
during the reproductive period (Lowe-McConnell
1999). The red piranha is a piscivorous characid fish
that also feeds on shrimps and other aquatic invertebrates
(Sazima & Machado 1990; Uetanabaro, Wang
& Abe 1993). During the reproductive season, this
species displays territorialism as they build and protect
nests in the aquatic vegetation (Lowe-McConnell
1999).
Experimental design
Samples were collected in six lakes located inside the
park, where fishing is only allowed for scientific
purposes. The lakes were divided in two groups: the
Gamba´, A´ guas Claras and Bonita lakes with alien
fishes, and the Gambazinho, Azul and Lagoinha lakes
without, constituting the control group (Table 1).
These groups constituted the factor type of lakes used
in the factorial analyses.
The ecotype of the littoral zone of these lakes was
classified (based on physical aspects) as macrophyte
and forest edge areas according to De Marco & Latini
(1998). The macrophyte areas are coastal areas with a
smooth bathymetric profile and without a pronounced
increase in depth. In these areas, the margin consists of
grasses and fallen logs rarely being shaded by forest.
The bathymetric profile and lack of canopy favour the
development of dense clusters of macrophytes, with a
dominance of Eleocharis sp., followed by Salvinia sp.
and Nympheaceae.
The forest edge areas correspond to littoral areas
where the bathymetric profile is steeper, with an abrupt
increase in depth. In these areas, the margin is
frequently shadowed by the forest, precluding the
development of aquatic macrophytes. Nympheaceae
species occur at greater depths. In these areas, the
substratum consists of vegetation and dead leaves.
In each lake, six littoral areas were identified: three
with macrophytes, regarded as possible refugia, and
three as forest edge areas. Each of these areas
constituted a sampling unit and these area categories
were the factor habitat type. In A ´ guas Claras Lake,
three areas with macrophytes and only two forest edge
areas were identified.
Fish were sampled between May and August 2000.
The order of sampling of the lakes was random. The
fishing effort was standardised using 13 gill nets with
the same length (10 m) and height (1.6 m), but with
meshes varying from 15 to 110 mm, knot to knot. The
gill nets were set perpendicularly from the shoreline in
a random order, maintaining a spacing of 5 m. Fishing
began at 16:00 hrs and finished at 08:00 hrs. Three
samples were taken from both areas comprising an
effort of 12 480 m h)1 in each lake.
Fishes were fixed in 10% formalin. In the laboratory,
specimens were identified to species using appropriate
identification keys (Ge´ry 1977; Garavello 1979;
Britski, Silimon & Lopes 1999). Standard length (Ls in
cm), and total weight (W in g) were recorded.
Statistical analysis
To compare species richness between the two groups of
lakes, the jackknife procedure was used (Magurran
1988) based on each sample collected. For lakes with
alien species, two estimates, total number of species and
number of native species were obtained. This procedure
presents an advantage over other richness estimators,
which normally give an underestimated value for the
community’s richness. The jackknife procedure gives a
more realistic estimate of species richness, by taking
into account rare species (Krebs 1999).
Shannon and Berger–Parker diversity indices were
calculated for each sampling unit (Magurran 1988).
Both indices were computed for the weight data and
for the total number of individuals. The Shannon
index (H¢) considers that the individuals were
randomly sampled and that all the species were
represented in the same sample (Magurran 1988).
The Berger–Parker index expresses the proportional
importance of the most abundant species (Magurran
1988) and it is one of the more satisfactory diversity
measures according to May (1975). The reciprocal of
that index (1/d) was used so that it reflected a direct
relationship with an increase in diversity. These indices
were used in the factorial analyses.
To evaluate richness among the lake communities,
the variance of the species richness estimated from the
jackknife procedure was used, to obtain 95% confidence
intervals, according to (Krebs 1999):
IC95% ¼ S^  ta qffivffiffiaffiffirffiffiðffiffiS^ffiffiffiÞffi; ð1Þ
where IC95% is the 95% confidence interval, ^S the
jackknife estimate of species richness, ta is the Student t
value for n ) 1 degrees of freedom for the suggested a
value and var(^S) the variance of the jackknife estimate.
Two-way ANOVA was used to test the hypotheses
(i)–(iii). In hypotheses (i) and (ii), one model was used
to test the homogeneity of the diversity indices (H¢ and
1/d) between lakes with and without alien species, and
the refugia effect of macrophytes. In hypothesis (iii),
this model was used to test total weight of captured fish
among the factors type of lakes (two levels, with and
without alien species), and type of habitats (two
levels, with and without macrophyte mats). Thus, the
additive linear model for the experimental design is:
Yijk ¼ l þ pi þ cj þ ðp  cÞij þ eijk ð2Þ
where Yijk(H¢ or 1/d) is the response variate, l the
overall mean, pi the factor type of lake with i ¼ 1, 2, cj
the factor type of habitats with j ¼ 1,2, (pÆc)ij the
interaction term, k the replication, and eijk a random
variate supposed N (0, r2).
Two-way ANCOVA was used to test for differences in
weight measurements (W) and the standard length (Ls)
of native species among lakes:
lnðWijkÞ ¼ l þ pi þ yj þ ðp  cÞij þ b lnðLsijkÞ þ eijk ;
ð3Þ
whereWijk (g) is the total weight, l the overall mean, pi
the factor type of lake with i ¼ 1, 2, cj the factor type
of habitats with j ¼ 1, 2, (pc)ij the interaction term,
k the replication and Lsijk is the covariate coefficient of
the covariate standard length, Ls (cm) and eijk is
a random variate supposed N (0, r2).
Independence among the experimental units, normality
of the data and homogeneity of the variances
are conditions for the use of factorial analyses. For all
groups of data, asymmetry (c1) and kurtosis (c2) of the
curve were analysed through comparison of the
estimated values of their respective estimators g1 and
g2 from the residual of the model ((observed value) –
(expected value)), with the tabulated values in
Snedecor & Cochran (1989) and D’Agostino & Tietjen
(1971). Homocedasticity was tested with the Levene
test when significant values were detected a square root
or logarithmic transformation was applied to the data
(Zar 1996). For all tests, a significance level of 5% was
used.


xresults
Community composition
Fish catches were restricted to the 15–60 mm mesh
sizes, gill nets greater than 70 mm mesh did not
capture fish. A total of 1301 individuals were caught,
with 265 individuals (20.3%) showing signs of predation,
as evidenced by mutilations and scars over the
body while in the nets. Weights of these fish were not
included and the length measurements were only used
when the mutilations did not affect determination of Ls
The remaining 1036 fish weighed 163 kg and were
distributed amongst 14 species belonging to 13 genera
and six families (Table 2). Characiformes dominated
with eight species in three families.
Lakes where alien fishes were present had at most,
six species of six genera and four families. These lakes
always had two alien species, C. cf. monoculus and
P. nattereri, while A ´ guas Claras included a third
species, A. ocellatus. The largest number of native
species found in lakes with alien species was three: the
trahira, Hoplias malabaricus (Bloch), the singing catfish,
Parauchenipterus striatulus (Steindachner) and the
curimbata´ , Prochilodus vimboides Kner.
Species richness and diversity
Use of the confidence intervals for species richness
showed that only Lake Azul had a greater richness
than lakes with alien species (Fig. 2) and that there
were no differences among lakes Gambazinho, Lagoinha
and Bonita. However, comparison of the second
richness estimate, only for native species, showed that
all the lakes with alien fish species had fewer total
species than lakes without alien species. Therefore, the
presence of alien species is correlated with decreasing
richness of fishes.
For all the diversity indices, the normality and
homocedasticity assumptions were not violated.
Two-way ANOVA indicated differences between lakes
with and without alien species (Table 3). There were no
differences among the factors type of habitat
(F(1,31) ¼ 0.060; P ¼ 0.808 for weight and F(1,31) ¼
0.006; P ¼ 0.940 for number of individuals) and there
was no interaction between the factors type of habitat
and type of lakes (F(1,31) ¼ 2.590; P ¼ 0.118 for
weight and F(1,31) ¼ 2.567 and P ¼ 0.119 for number
of individuals). However, for both indices, significant
differences for the factor type of lakes were observed
(F(1,31) ¼ 10.512; P ¼ 0.003 for weight and F(1,31) ¼
49.631; P ¼ 0.003 for number of individuals). These
results confirm that diversity is higher in lakes without
alien species, and that areas of higher heterogeneity are
apparently not being used as refugia by native species.
The inverse of Berger–Parker index for weight did
not reveal differences among the factors type of
habitats (F(1,31) ¼ 0.026; P ¼ 0.874), type of lakes
(F(1,31) ¼ 2.443; P ¼ 0.128), and there was no interaction
between these two factors (F(1,31) ¼ 1.371;
P ¼ 0.251). The same index calculated for number of
individuals indicated equality among the factors type
of habitats (F(1,31) ¼ 1.358; P ¼ 0.253) and differences
among the factors type of lakes (F(1,31) ¼ 29.980;
P < 0.001), as well as a significant interaction between
the two factors (F(1,31) ¼ 7.854; P ¼ 0.009; Fig. 3).
These results indicate that diversity is greater in lakes
without alien species, but not so in lakes with the
presence of aquatic macrophythes. However, the
results of the interaction suggest that in the most
heterogeneous habitats there is a tendency for lower
diversity with the presence of alien species, reflecting a
characteristic of refugia.
Total weight and mean weight of native populations
Data for total weight of fish captured in the communities
were normally distributed but did not meet the
test for homoscedasticity (Levene test: F(1,31) ¼ 4.014;
P ¼ 0.015), and were thus log transformed (F(1,31) ¼
2.343; P ¼ 0.091).
Two-way ANOVA of transformed data with normal
residuals, showed no difference in weight of fish across
the factor type of habitats (F(1,31) ¼ 0.610;
P ¼ 0.441). Similarly, no difference was found for
the factor type of lakes (F(1,31) ¼ 0.251; P ¼ 0.620) or
for the interaction between these two factors
(F(1,31) ¼ 1.671; P ¼ 0.206; Table 4). The explanation
of this model was low (r2 ¼ 0.07).
Only three species of native fish were detected in
lakes with alien species: the Brazilian croaker,
Pachypops adspersus Steindachner, the singing catfish,
P. striatulus and trahira, H. malabaricus. The
weight data were insufficient to perform a strong test
for P. adspersus (n ¼ 7) and P. striatulus (n ¼ 14),
leaving comparisons for H. malabaricus (n ¼ 254)
only.
The relationship between weight (W) and standard
length (Ls ) for H. malabaricus was not linear, but it
could be made so with a log–log transformation. In the
exploratory application of Eq. (2) outliers were detected,
even after successive removals. The conclusions,
however, remained the same. As there is not a ready
equivalent non-parametric test for the ANCOVA, the
first result was accepted, treated as a strong one, even
though asymmetric results and significant kurtosis
were detected.
Two-way ANCOVA revealed that habitat complexity
(type of habitats) did not affect the weight of
H. malabaricus (F(1,250) ¼ 0.002; P ¼ 0.969). However,
the presence of alien species (type of lakes) affected it
(F(1,250) ¼ 6.629; P ¼ 0.011), even with a difference of
just 6 g. The interaction between the factors type of
habitats and type of lakes did not exert an effect
on the weight of H. malabaricus (F(1,250) ¼ 1.308;
P ¼ 0.254). The covariate Ls was significant, as expected
in the weight/length relationship (F(1,250) ¼ 42,499;
P < 0.001). The factors and covariate explained 82%
of the model (Table 5).

xdiscussion
Effects of the alien fishes on the local fish
community
The presence of alien species in lakes of the River Doce
State Park is correlated with reduced richness of the
local fish community. This agrees with ecological
studies in several parts of the world that focus on the
invasion of reservoirs by alien species (Ricciardi, Neves
& Rasmussen 1998). Taken together, such studies
indicate a non-random pattern in the response of
communities faced with invasion by alien species.
Behavioural relationships between native and alien
species can be important in explaining the success of
biological invasions (Probert & Litvaitis 1996; Holway
& Suarez 1999). Parental care and predatory behaviour
are two ecological characteristics of the alien species of
this study (Lowe-McConnell 1999). The parental care
may increase the competitiveness of these species and
the predatory behaviour put the alien fishes on top of
the food web in these lakes. The absence of these
characteristics in the populations of the native species,
indicating insufficient anti-predatory mechanisms as
seen in Table 2, where the traits cn, ds, dj, if, are not
possessed by native species, except H. malabaricus,
suggesting that the presence of alien species is the
precursor of local extinction of the native populations.
It is expected that lakes invaded by alien species would
have a decrease in richness and diversity of their fish
fauna as evident in Figure 2 and Table 3, although in
Lake Victoria with a reduction of the stocks of the
alien Nile perch the original fauna is resetting itself
(Mkumbo, Ezekiel, Budeba & Cowx 2002).
Hoplias malabaricus is the only native species that is
still able to persist in the invaded lakes. Its persistence
is probably linked to its prey-ambush foraging
behaviour and strong territoriality during the reproductive
season (Paiva 1974). Its persistence in disturbed
habitats is also evident by the similarity in the
mean weight of its populations among lakes with and
without alien species, an unexpected pattern, if the
young were rare in the lakes with the alien species due
to its preferential predation. The current analysis
indicated a significant difference of just 6 g among
the mean weights in lakes with alien species (230 g) and
without (224 g). This small difference, albeit statistically
significant, has no practical meaning. Furthermore,
the log-transformation resulted in a compression
of the data, thus decreasing the variance.
Although the alien species reduced richness and the
diversity of the native fish community, the total weight
of captured fish was not reduced in the lakes with
aliens. This reflects a decrease of the energy lost in
the food web due to the loss of trophic levels in the
community and, consequently, to the reduction of the
sum of energy lost in the transfers among the existing
levels. This may be exemplified by the Nile perch in
Lake Victoria: between the 1980s and 1990s the total
catch increased five times and the Nile perch catch
contributed over 70% of total landings; but in the mid-
1990s this dominant species showed signs of decline,
due to the intense fishing pressure and use of illegal
gears (Mkumbo et al. 2002).
If a native fish population is not competitive or
possess an efficient anti-predatory mechanism, its
chances of persisting in invaded communities, before
the presence of the alien species, can be linked to its
ability of using refugia inside the lakes. An area of
higher heterogeneity inside aquatic systems often
reduces the effectiveness of predators and strong
competitors (Power, Marks & Parker 1992) and
increases the persistence of prey species and weak
competitors (Ross 1991). Although there is a tendency
in the presence of alien species, towards a smaller
reduction in diversity in areas with macrophytes
compared with areas of forest edge (Fig. 3), the
diversity and weight of the species is the same between
these two areas.
Consequently, in the lakes with alien species, the
most heterogeneous habitats do not apparently serve
as refugia for the native fish populations. These facts
suggest that the importance of macrophyte mats as
refugia to native fishes should be related with bionomics
and behaviour of native and alien species that
comprise the impacted community. If an alien species
efficiently uses these mats, e.g. P. nattereri, there would
be a smaller chance for a native species, e.g. the
chameleon cichlid, Cichlasoma facetum (Jenyns), to
efficiently use the same area as refugia.
Perspectives for the fish community of middle River
Doce Basin
The reduction in the regional fish community is still
not fully understood: the group of streams that cross
the park and the channels that drain excess water
during the rainy season, connect the lakes and may
allow a temporary connection that may facilitate the
dispersion of aquatic organisms. This connection
between lotic and lentic habitats seems to be the main
factor responsible for the invasion of those lakes by
alien species on a regional level. This is evident from
the presence of alien species in at least 67% (n ¼ 45) of
the lakes in the park. Thus, the occurrence of alien
species in the lakes of the area has increased and
consequently the regional fish diversity has declined. It
is concluded that the dispersion of alien species is not
only restricted to some lakes of the park and their
neighbouring habitats, but it is affecting the maintenance
of the whole fish community of the valley of the
middle River Doce.
To understand fully how alien species affect the
native fish community of the area, information is
needed on their dispersion within and between lakes
and streams to formulate the necessary measures to
conserve the native fish community in areas free of
invaders.