xabstract
Changes in native fish abundance (catch per unit effort–CPUE) and species composition
were assessed before and after the introduction of Oreochromis niloticus
Linnaeus, 1757 (Nile tilapia) in the Caribbean estuary Ciénaga Grande de Santa
Marta (CGSM), northern Colombia. Multiple regression analysis was used to relate
the abundance of O. niloticus to that of non-native fishes and environmental
variables such as salinity, dissolved oxygen, pH, local rainfall, and river discharge.
Species composition and abundance of native fishes were found to vary with environmental
conditions in different zones but on a large scale, overall abundance
remained approximately constant over all studied periods. Abundance of the native
catfish Cathorops mapale Betancur-R. and Acero-P., 2005 was negatively related to
the abundance of O. niloticus, and both varied with salinity. Overall fish diversity
varied in periods when O. niloticus was present, which coincided with low salinity
conditions. Our findings indicate that environmental fluctuations constrain the
long-term establishment of O. niloticus in the estuary and thus its possible effects
on abundance and species composition of the native ichthyofauna. However, it is
feasible that the arrival of a more tolerant strain of O. niloticus, its future adaptation
to the variable environment, or a longer duration of freshwater conditions in
the estuary, could favor its long-term proliferation. In such a case, the occurrence of
negative impacts on the native fishes cannot be disregarded. This is, to our knowledge,
the first study investigating the impacts of O. niloticus on the ichthyofauna of
a Caribbean estuary.

xintroduction
The introduction of new species into aquatic ecosystems has become common
practice, but also a serious ecological problem: although it is intended as a solution
to overcome shortage in food supply in many tropical countries, such introductions
are recognized as one of the primary threats to biodiversity (Sala et al., 2000; Bax et
al., 2003; Sala and Knowlton, 2006; Rahel, 2007). Species introductions may result
in biological invasions that dramatically affect native species through predation or
grazing, competition for food or space, and hybridization with native species. These
and other impacts may eventually lead to alterations in the structure and function of
the ecosystems and cause the loss of valuable resources (Mack et al., 2000; Mooney
and Cleland, 2001; Hoffmeister et al., 2005). The introduction of non-native species
in Africa and the Great Lakes of North America, for example, is considered one of
the main causes for the collapse of the fisheries in those regions (Ogutu-Ohwayo and
Hecky, 1991; Hall and Mills, 2000).
Colombia’s fish fauna includes at least one third of the total number of fish species
known in South America (Mojica et al., 2002), however, it also has one of the highest
numbers of non-native fish species with at least 153 recorded (Gutierrez, 2004).
Many of these fishes were intentionally introduced to increase local fishery production,
for use in the ornamental fish trade, or for aquaculture purposes. Many others
were accidentally introduced as a result of inadequate management of intentional
introductions. Although there have been numerous warnings about the potential
consequences of the increasing number of non-native fishes on the native Colombian
icthyofauna, there are as yet no published studies directly addressing those impacts,
even though some non-native fishes already constitute important fishery resources
in several regions of the country (Diaz and Alvarez, 1998; Álvarez and Salazar, 2001;
Gutierrez, 2004).
The Ciénaga Grande de Santa Marta (CGSM) is located along the north coast of
Colombia as part of the delta of the Magdalena River, which is one of the largest
deltas in the Caribbean Sea. The CGSM estuary is the main source of food and income
for the region due to its large size (ca 1280 km2) and productivity (Sánchez and
Rueda, 1999; Gocke et al., 2003). The most important natural factors influencing the
distribution and abundance of resources in the CGSM are the freshwater input from
the Magdalena River (Wiedemann, 1973; Kaufmann and Hevert, 1973) and saltwater
input from the Caribbean Sea (Sanchez and Rueda, 1999; Rueda, 2001; Blanco et al.,
2006, 2007). Interruption of fresh and marine water input, pollution, deforestation,
erosion, and over-fishing in CGSM has led to the loss of many valuable resources
during the last 40 yrs (Botero and Mancera, 1996; Botero and Salzwedel, 1999; Rueda
and Defeo, 2003). Former waterways were re-established by dredging in 1998 with
the goal of recovering former ecological conditions. Since that time, non-native fishes
such as the snakeskin gourami (Trichogaster pectoralis Regan, 1910), the Nile tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus Linnaeus, 1757), the hybrid red tilapia (Oreochromis sp.), and
the tambaqui (Colosoma macropomum Cuvier, 1818) increased their presence in the
system (Sanchez, 1996; Bateman, 1998). Since 1999, O. niloticus has become one of
the principal fishery resources, accounting for almost 60% of all catches in 1999 and
2000 (INVEMAR, 2006), but decreasing to < 10% thereafter. This drastic variation
in abundance of O. niloticus seems to be related to environmental fluctuations (e.g.,
salinity) in the estuary (Blanco et al., 2007).
The goal of our study was to determine whether the observed spatio-temporal variation
in species composition and abundance of native fish were related to the presence
or abundance of the non-native fish O. niloticus or to environmental variability
or both. We used descriptive and multivariate analysis to identify spatio-temporal
trends in the fluctuations of native fish abundance and species composition before
and after the introduction of O. niloticus. We also used multiple regression analysis
to test for possible correlations between changes in native fish abundances and
abundance of O. niloticus, salinity, pH, dissolved oxygen, and freshwater input (local
rainfall and river discharge). We predicted that changes in the catches of the most
abundant native fishes would be strongly related to the variation of the catches of O.
niloticus. To our knowledge, this is the first study investigating the possible impacts
of the O. niloticus on the native ichthyofauna of a Caribbean estuary.


xmethods
Study Site.—The CGSM is located between 10°43´–11°00´N and 74°16´–74°35´W in the
delta of the Magdalena River on the north coast of Colombia (Fig. 1). Its major connection to
the Caribbean Sea is Boca de la Barra, an 80–100 m wide artificial outlet (Santos-Martinez
and Acero, 1991). The system receives freshwater from several rivers originating in the Sierra
Nevada de Santa Marta mountain system and from the Magdalena River through a complex
of channels and swamps termed Pajarales (Fig. 1; Botero and Salzwedel, 1999). The mean annual
water temperature is 30 °C and the depth in the system varies between 1 and 7 m. The
salinity ranges between 0 and 40 and the tidal amplitude between 20 and 30 cm (Polanía et
al., 2001). The climate in the area is particularly dry (arid) with a mean air temperature of 28 °C
and a mean hydrological deficit that ranges between −211.6 and −1146.8 mm yr–1 resulting
from the difference between mean local rainfall and mean evaporation (Botero and Salzwedel,
1999; Blanco et al., 2006). Therefore, riverine water input is vital for the system’s water
budget (Kauffman and Hevert, 1973). A dry season extends from December to March and a
rainy season from April to November (Blanco et al., 2006). Of the 122 teleost fish species that
have been recorded in the CGSM, 81 are commercially exploited (Polanía et al., 2001). Historically
important native estuarine species include Mugil incilis Hancock, 1830, Cathorops
mapale Betancur-R. and Acero-P., 2005, Eugerres plumieri Valenciennes, 1830, Ariopsis bonillai
Miles, 1945, Megalops atlanticus Valenciennes, 1846, and Elops saurus Linnaeus, 1766
(Santos-Martinez and Acero, 1991; Sanchez and Rueda, 1999).
Data Collection.—The data used for this study were collected by the Institute for Marine
and Coastal Research (INVEMAR) in Santa Marta, Colombia. Since 1994, monthly fishery
information was collected within the framework of an ecosystem monitoring program.
Data collected included weight of catch (kg), species composition of catch, effort (number of
fishing trips) by gear type and location, as well as environmental information such as salinity,
dissolved oxygen (mg L–1), and pH. We also used local rainfall (mm) and river discharge (m3
s–1) data provided by the National Institute for Meteorology, Hydrology and Environmental
Studies (IDEAM). Catch per unit effort (CPUE) was calculated and used as a relative measure
of fish abundance in the system—the term abundance shall be used throughout this study
instead of CPUE. For the analyses we used fish abundance (CPUE) data from cast nets. This
gear was the most consistently used over the eight-year study period and collected the widest
spectrum of species when compared to all the other gear types.
Data Analysis.—Our study area was divided into four zones: ZA, the main lagoon; ZB,
the lagoon complex of Pajarales; ZC, the lagoon complex in the south-western protected area;
and ZD, the western side of Salamanca Island (Fig. 1). Moving east to west through these
zones (A–D) represents a gradient of decreasing salinity (Giraldo et al., 1995). The change in
abundance of O. niloticus was used as a criterion to divide the set of monthly data into four
periods: PI = 1994–1995 (few or no O. niloticus in catches; N = 58); PII = 1996 (O. niloticus
present but occurring in < 5% of the total catches; N = 25); PIII = 1999–2001 (after reestablishment
of freshwater and salt water connections and marked O. niloticus increase; N = 34);
and PIV = 2002–2003 (subsequent O. niloticus decrease; N = 36).
Species Composition and Fish Abundance.—Kruskal-Wallis tests were performed to compare
differences in abundance of O. niloticus, species richness (R, number of fish species),
fish diversity (expressed as Shannon-Weaver Index–H’; Shannon and Weaver, 1949), and environmental
parameters among the four periods of study (Sokal and Rohlf, 1995). Multiple
comparisons (Kruskall-Wallis routine in Statistica v. 8) were used to test differences between
all pairs of periods compared. Due to the lack of environmental data of PIII in ZD, this zone
was excluded from these analyses.
A two way analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) was performed to test if species composition
and multispecific fish abundance significantly differed among periods and zones (factors;
Clarke, 1993). A Similarity Percentage (SIMPER) analysis was used to identify the species accounting
for most of the similarity in abundance and species composition within periods and
zones. It also was used to determine the species that discriminate best between these grouping
factors (Clarke, 1993). For these analyses, all fish species accounting for more than 1% of
the total abundance in at least one of the 8 yrs of the study were selected (21 species; Table 1).
PRIMER for Windows v. 5.2.2 (Plymouth Marine Laboratory) was used for these analyses.
Relationship Between Fish Abundance and Environmental Variables.—Forward stepwise
Multiple Regression Analysis (MRA; Zar, 1996) was conducted to determine the extent that
O. niloticus abundance and environmental factors explained the monthly variations in fish
abundance for the six most abundant and commercially important native fish species. Due to
high correlation between salinity and abundance of O. niloticus (Spearman Rank Order Correlation
= −0.60, P < 0.05), these two variables were used separately as independent variables.
All data were Log+1 transformed to normalize the residuals and 0.025 was used as significance
level (Bonferroni adjustment). In all cases the statistical criterion (F) to enter variables
into the model was F > 1. In the first MRA, the abundances of the native species were used
as dependant variables and that of O. niloticus as an independent variable, while in a second
MRA the abundances of all fishes including O. niloticus were used as dependent variables,
and salinity, pH, and DO as independent variables. Using ZA as a reference, dummy variables
were created for ZB and ZD to determine the effect of zone differences in the variables
in these two MRAs. Zone C was excluded from these analyses due to lack of environmental
data. Given the difficulty of establishing geographical limits to the influence of local rainfall
and river input, their regional monthly average values were used in a third MRA as independent
variables and the regional monthly mean abundance of native fishes and O. niloticus as
dependent variables.

xresults
Species Composition and Fish Abundance.—The abundance of O. niloticus
differed significantly among all four periods (H = 195.83, df = 3, N = 327, P < 0.05;
all post-hoc, P < 0.05) from complete absence in PI and very low abundance in PII to
very high in PIII when it dominated the catches in the estuary and back to very low in
PIV (Fig. 2). In contrast, the group of native fish maintained a very similar abundance
over the entire study period. A variable group of very few species (2–4) represented
between 70 and 95% of the total abundance (Fig. 3). The native estuarine fish M. incilis
was the only species consistently ranking among the most abundant over all zones
and periods. The non-native fish O. niloticus became the most abundant species (total
CPUE > 50%) during PIII in all zones except in ZA, where M. incilis was the most
abundant. Oreochromis niloticus drastically decreased during PIV in all zones. The
abundance of the native C. mapale decreased during the periods when O. niloticus
was the most abundant fish in all zones. Eugerres plumieri varied considerably from
period to period, but with no apparent relation to any other species. Native freshwater
fishes like Triportheus magdalenae Steindachner, 1878, Prochilodus magdalenae
Steindachner, 1879, and Hoplias malabaricus Bloch, 1794 appeared only in PII or PIII
in ZB, ZC, and ZD. Piscivorous fishes such as A. bonillai, M. atlanticus, and E. saurus
increased in some zones during PIII and PIV.
The small differences in richness (number of fish species) and fish diversity (H’)
(Fig. 4) were not significant (P < 0.008) during the period of greatest abundance of O.
niloticus (PIII) relative to the earlier periods. However, during the following period
(PIV) with a low abundance of O. niloticus, a few differences were significant (P <
0.008) in some zones relative to PIII. Fish diversity (H’) decreased in ZA (H 3, N = 87 =
11.31; Fig. 4E) but increased in ZC (H’: H 3, N = 79 = 20.33; Fig. 4G) and ZD (H 2, N = 74 =
26.48; Fig. 4H). In this last zone, richness also increased during PIV (H 2, N = 74 = 24.25;
Fig. 4D).
The two way crossed Analysis of Similarities (ANOSIM) revealed significant differences
in species composition and abundance among periods (R = 0.601, P < 0.001)
and zones (R = 0.49; P < 0.001), as well as significant differences (R > 0.3; P < 0.001)
between all pairwise comparisons. Furthermore, the SIMPER analysis revealed that
M. incilis was the species that best accounted for the similarity in species composition
and abundance in all zones (% Similarity > 16) and periods (% Similarity >
22), except in PIII when O. niloticus accounted for the largest similarity (22%). Oreochromis
niloticus was the species that best discriminated between most pairs of compared
periods (% Dissimilarity > 12) and zones (% Dissimilarity > 10), followed by the
native fish C. mapale (% Dissimilarity ~9 between periods and ~10 between zones).
Relationship Between Fish Abundance and Environmental Variables.—
Salinity and river discharge were the variables exhibiting the greatest variation over
the study periods (Fig. 5). Salinity fluctuations were significantly different among
study periods except in ZD (ZA: H3, N = 71 = 14.48; ZB: H3, N = 69 = 38.65; ZD: P < 0.05,
H2, N = 33 = 0.13; P > 0.05) while water discharge differed significantly among periods in
the whole region (Magdalena: H3, N = 89 = 8.15; other rivers: H3, N = 91 = 13.85; P < 0.05).
Changes in salinity (Fig. 5D–E) reflected (opposite) patterns of water discharge of
the Magdalena River (Fig. 4B), which is the main input of freshwater into the estuary.
Zones A and B had similar patterns of salinity fluctuation (Fig. 5D,E), varying from
high (20±14 to 35±21) in PI and PIV to low values (6±9 to 10±9) in PII and PIII. pH
differed significantly among all zones (ZA: H3, N = 71 = 21.25; ZB: H3, N = 68 = 52.32; ZD:
H2, N = 33 = 13.84; P < 0.05; Fig. 5G–H). This parameter tended to decrease slightly over
the four periods at ZA, and more abruptly at ZB. No environmental data are available
for PIII in zone D (Fig. 5F–I), therefore data from this zone must be interpreted with
caution. However, overall, the salinity range in this zone is much lower (0–5) than at
the other zones, whereas pH is similar to that of the other zones.
Multiple regression analyses revealed that the environmental variables (salinity,
pH, and river discharge) and the abundance of O. niloticus contributed to variation in
the abundance of native fishes. The abundance of O. niloticus best explained (Table
2, P < 0.025) variation in abundance of C. mapale (r = −0.45) and M. atlanticus (r =
0.19). When salinity, pH, and DO were treated as independent variables (Table 3, P
< 0.025), salinity best explained the variation in abundance of M. incilis (r = −0.32),
C. mapale (r = 0.45), E. plumieri (r = −0.35), and O. niloticus (r = −0.43). pH best
explained variation in abundance of A. bonillai (r = −0.50), E. saurus (r = −0.44), and
M. atlanticus (r = −0.51). When river discharge and local rainfall were treated as
independent variables (Table 4, P < 0.05), river discharge best explained variation in
abundance of E. plumieri (r = 0.39) and E. saurus (r = −0.29).

xdiscussion
The hypothesis of O. niloticus being solely responsible for fluctuations in the abundance
of native ichthyofauna should be rejected since fluctuations in environmental
variables (salinity, pH, and river discharge) explained much of the variation in abundance
of most fish species including O. niloticus. However, our findings indicate that
although the duration of low salinity conditions was relatively short, this non-native
fish could have affected the native ichthyofauna.
On the largest spatial scale (all zones combined) the overall native fish abundance
remained quite constant over the four study periods. However, when the specific
composition was analyzed for each period and zone, changes in relative abundance
on the species level became evident. This relative constancy of the overall native fish
component could be indicative of a high resilience due to a high species redundancy,
meaning that this component has several fish species with similar functions and they
react in different ways to the same environmental fluctuations (Walker, 1995; Gunderson,
2000; Hooper et al., 2005). Such a differential response to the environment
(as seen in the MRA results) may explain the observed variations in species abundance
and composition at smaller spatial and temporal scales (zones and periods),
and therefore the changes in fish diversity and richness.
During the periods of low salinity, the inflow of unusual amounts of freshwater
may increase the variety and size of available habitats for freshwater and euryhaline
species in the estuary. In contrast, species not well adapted to low salinity may migrate
to areas with more favorable conditions or experience a decrease in their populations.
This is evidenced by the increase in the number and abundance of native
freshwater fishes (e.g., P. magdalenae, H. malabaricus, T. magdalenae) during PIII,
and the decrease in abundance of native estuarine fishes (e.g., M. incilis, C. mapale)
over the same period. The increase of piscivorous fishes during PIII and PIV in some
zones might be a response to an increase of prey represented by non-native and native
freshwater fishes. This may explain the positive relationship between the predator
M. atlanticus and the potential prey O. niloticus.
The great adaptability of O. niloticus to new environmental conditions is evidenced
by its high growth rate, variable maturation size, and opportunistic feeding (Trewavas,
1983; Balirwa, 1998; Beveridge and McAndrew, 2000). In strongly altered
and stressed ecosystems, O. niloticus could be a superior competitor, debilitating
or completely out-competing native species (Ogutu-Ohwayo, 1990; Ogutu-Ohwayo
and Hecky, 1991; Léveque, 2002; Canonico et al., 2005). For example, the negative
relationship between the abundances of O. niloticus and the native fish C. mapale
could be indicative of interspecific competition. Both species utilize soft bottoms, O.
niloticus for spawning and C. mapale for feeding (Carpenter, 2002; Froese and Pauly,
2006). The abundance of both fishes, however, was related to the variation in salinity,
so they could be responding instead in opposite ways to the same environmental
variable. Thus, although the SIMPER analysis revealed a shift in the dominant species
within the fish community during the period of greatest abundance of O. niloticus,
this does not necessarily imply that the non-native fish displaced native species.
Further research is needed to investigate the likelihood of competition between native
and non-native fishes in the ecosystem.
The salinity tolerance of tilapias is highly variable, as evidenced by the different
tolerance limits reported in different populations of O. niloticus. In laboratory experiments,
Watanabe et al. (1985) reported a salinity tolerance limit of 19, Villegas
(1990) of 10 and Schofield et al. (2007) > 40 after weekly increments. Peterson et
al. (2004) reported the existence of actively reproductive populations of O. niloticus
in coastal environments with salinities that range at about 25 in Mississippi, USA.
Oreochromis niloticus also has established wild populations in a coastal lagoon in
eastern Italy with salinities between 22 and 33 (Scordella et al., 2003). In CGSM,
O. niloticus seems to be less euryhaline since its abundance dramatically decreased
when salinities increased above 15 (Blanco et al., 2007). This variable environmental
tolerance indicates a high adaptability of the species. Therefore, it should not be
discarded that the arrival of a more tolerant strain of this fish or its adaptation to the
variable environment, could favor a long term establishment of O. niloticus in the
estuary.
Negative impacts of tilapias have been reported in several ecosystems around
the world (Costa-Pierce, 2003; Canonico et al., 2005). Oreochromis niloticus has
out-competed several native tilapiine species in the African Lake Victoria (Ogutu-
Ohwayo, 1990; Ogutu-Ohwayo and Hecky, 1991). Tilapias, including O. niloticus,
have impacted the native fish communities in several lakes of Nicaragua, where they
eliminated the habitat of some native fish by feeding on native aquatic plants. Tilapias
also compete with native fish for spawning sites in the same lakes and seem to be
responsible for an outbreak of a trematode parasite that has probably caused blindness
among native cichlids (McKaye et al., 1995; McCrary et al., 2007). The rapid
proliferation of O. niloticus and its high potential to compete for spawning grounds
with native fish (e.g., centrarchids) is considered as a threat to the US coastal areas of
Mississippi (Peterson et al., 2004, 2005, 2006).
Other studies in tropical and sub tropical estuaries and coastal lagoons have also
found that abiotic factors such as salinity are the primary factors determining the
fish species richness, distribution, and abundance. Such is the case of the Shellharbour
lagoon in southeast Australia (Griffiths, 2001), the Caeté estuary in northern
Brazil (Barletta et al., 2005), St. Lucia estuary in South Africa (Whitfield et al., 2006),
and Terminos lagoon in the southern Gulf of Mexico (Sosa-López et al., 2007). Based
on their research experience in California streams, Moyle and Light (1996) suggested
that “if abiotic factors are appropriate for a non-native species, then that species is
likely to successfully invade, regardless of the biota already present”. In our study of
O. niloticus in CGSM, its establishment was likely restricted by the lack of appropriate
abiotic factors. Changes in the recipient ecosystem can foster adequate biological,
ecological, and environmental conditions creating an “invasion window” for the successful
establishment of new species (Johnstone, 1986; Carlton, 1996); the timing of
arrival of these new species often coincides with favorable environmental conditions
(Crawley, 1989). Thus, if favorable conditions occur in the CGSM estuary for longer
periods, O. niloticus may be able to establish self-sustaining populations.
Being one of the most popular cultured fish worldwide, O. niloticus has been
introduced in many tropical countries (FAO, 2006). However, the impacts of this
non-native fish in natural waters are not yet well studied (Canonico et al., 2003; Costa-
Pierce, 2003). The present study is, to our knowledge, the first to investigate the
impact of this fish on the native ichthyofauna of a Caribbean estuary. Our findings
indicate that environmental fluctuations constrain the long-term establishment of
O. niloticus in the estuary and may therefore reduce its possible effects in the abundance
and species composition of the native ichthyofauna. However, it is feasible that
the arrival of a more tolerant strain of this species or its future adaptation to the
variable environment or a longer duration of freshwater conditions, could favor a
long-term proliferation of O. niloticus. Considering the biological features of this
species, in such a case, the occurrence of negative impacts on the native fishes can
not be discounted.