xabstract
When the Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas, Thunberg) was introduced into France for aquaculture in the midsixties,
it was initially confined to the sites where it was farmed. Subsequent global warming most likely
facilitated the establishment of wild populations throughout the French coastline. This phenomenon of
spread has become so great that oyster reefs have recently appeared in sheltered estuaries, on both soft and
hard substrate. The present study examined two such sites in the Bay of Brest, Brittany. It is the first to
investigate the impacts of this new substrate on the biocoenosis of uncolonised intertidal habitats in France.
Increased species richness and abundance of intertidal macrofauna were observed in the presence of oyster
reefs on both, mud (4 and 20 fold respectively) and rock (5 fold for both). The dominance of suspension
feeders in mud changed to carnivores in reefs and their underlying sediment. Calculation of biotic
coefficients (BC) of the soft-bottom fauna revealed only a slight organic enrichment, and the organic and silt
composition in the sediment beneath oyster reefs were not significantly different from that on bare sites. On
rock, the dominance of grazers remained unchanged between bare rock and oyster reef, while reef on rock
was also characterised by deposit and detritic feeders. C. gigas is suspected to cause a homogenisation of
coastal habitats with an impoverishment of overall quality but we detected only 11 common species
between reefs on mud (60 species) and those on rock (55 species).

xintroduction
Introduced marine species are known to have an impact on native
ecosystems, especially on very productive systems like those in
coastal regions and estuaries, which have high biodiversity (Ruiz et al.,
1997; Cohen and Carlton, 1998; Ruiz et al., 1999; Wasson et al., 2005).
Although only a few introduced species (10–15%) are considered as
pests (Williamson and Fitter, 1996; Ruiz et al., 1997), most studies
show undesirable effects of invasive species on native biodiversity,
community structure and function, genetic diversity, population
dynamics, economy, and even human health (Ruiz et al., 1997; Parker
et al., 1999; Mack et al., 2000; Grosholz, 2002).
However, although it cannot be denied that introduced species are
capable of causing dramatic damaging effects on the ecosystems they
invade, some studies show that such invaders are not always as bad as
they might seem (Thieltges et al., 2006). This ambivalence is
illustrated by the example of the American slipper limpet Crepidula
fornicata (Thieltges et al., 2006), which was accidentally introduced
into Europe from the Eastern coast of America at the end of the
nineteenth century and now extends along European coasts from
Spain to Norway (Blanchard, 1997). In localised areas, such as some of
the places it has colonised in France, populations reach very high
densities (1000 individualsm−2) that can have detrimental ecological
impacts like: increased siltation related to pseudofaeces and faeces
production (Erhold et al., 1998), lowering of native species recruitment
by spatial competition processes (Thouzeau et al., 2000), and
alteration of benthic community structure (Thouzeau et al., 2000;
Chauvaud et al., 2003a,b). However, in certain situations, this invasion
has had positive effects. One study showed that C. fornicata protects
the Bay of Brest (France) from toxic algal blooms by changing
plankton composition and food web structure (Chauvaud et al., 2000).
The extensive spread of C. fornicata has increased suspension feeder
biomass and therefore increased biodeposition, which has then
enhanced biogenic silica retention in the bay. Recycling of biogenic
silica through the summer maintains diatom populations and limits
chronic toxic algal blooms occurring in eutrophic conditions (Chauvaud
et al., 2000; Ragueneau et al., 2002, 2005).
In the present study we examined ecological impacts of another
non-indigenous species, the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas, on
intertidal communities of the coastal ecosystem of the Bay of Brest
(France). Pacific oysters have been intentionally introduced into 66
countries for aquaculture (Ruesink et al., 2005) and self-sustaining
populations have today become established in 17 of these. In some of
these countries C.gigas has been revealed to be more competitive than
native oyster species, such as in New Zealand where C.gigas rapidly
out-recruited the native Saccostrea comercialis (Dinamani, 1991). The
same type of competition was observed in Australia where,30 years
after its introduction C.gigas recruitment dominated that of S.
commercialis (Chew, 1990). Reise (1998), Diederich (2005, 2006)
and Schmidt et al. (2008) showed that the native intertidal blue
mussel beds in the Wadden Sea had become overgrown by Pacific
oysters but had not been replaced by them (Fey et al., 2010). Markert
et al. (2010) found that Pacific oyster reefs were higher in diversity
than native blue mussel beds, promoting epibenthic species of the
Wadden Sea. In Willapa Bay, the comparison of native intertidal
mudflat and oyster-dominated habitats as well showed that oysters
harboured a higher diversity of epifauna (Hosack et al., 2006).
Ecological effects of invasive Pacific oysters on intertidal communities
have been very little examined so far, especially on rocky communities
for which only one study is known (Escapa et al., 2004).
C. gigas was intentionally introduced into France at the end of the
1960 s to replace cultivated oyster stocks of Ostrea edulis and
Crassostrea angulata decimated by disease (Grizel and Heral, 1991).
For more than 20 years C. gigas did not reproduce in Brittany. Because
C. gigas is a subtropical species, its minimal temperature requirement
for spawning is above 18 °C (Mann, 1979) and the water was simply
not warm enough on this part of the French coast. However, with the
rise in temperature that has occurred over recent decades, environmental
conditions in Brittany became favourable for spawning and C.
gigas started to reproduce there in the 1990s (Lejart, 2009). Today,
wild sustainable populations have become established in the
intertidal zone all along the Brittany coast. Although populations are
found on exposed oceanic shores, the highest densities, with more
than 1000 individuals m−2 (Lejart and Hily, 2005), are reached in
estuarine and sheltered habitats. Over the last few years, particularly
on soft sediment but more recently even on rocks, oysters have
become so abundant that one can observe the formation of oyster
reefs. That is particularly the case in the Bay of Brest where the total
stock of wild oysters was estimated at 10 000 tons in 2005 (Lejart and
Hily, 2005). Although the presence of oysters on the Brittany shore is
now common, oyster reefs are new biogenic structures on these
coasts. We are therefore witnessing a drastic change in the intertidal
landscape. In the United States, oyster reefs of Crassostrea virginica,
are seen as a valuable habitat that needs to be restored and protected
from overfishing (Coen and Luckenbach, 2000; Peterson et al., 2003;
Rodney and Paynter, 2006). The situation is however very different in
France as the new oyster reefs are not native, but the result of the
settlement and spread of an alien species. The present study is the first
to investigate the influences of this species on intertidal communities
in France. Its goal was to examine the oyster reefs formed by invasive
C. gigas in Brittany by addressing three basic questions: 1) Can we
consider these reefs as a new biogenic habitat? 2) Can we detect
differential responses of benthic macrofaunal organisms to the
formation of oyster reefs on mud and on rock? 3) Does this new
habitat induce a homogenization of intertidal communities?

xmethods
2.1. Study area
The study was carried out in the Bay of Brest, western Brittany
(France), in January 2006. This shallow semi-enclosed coastal bay
covers 180 km2 and is connected to the Atlantic Ocean by a small strait
(1.8 km wide, 50 m deep). Freshwater entering the bay is mostly
(80%) brought in by two rivers, the Elorn in the North of the bay and
the Aulne in the South.
The Bay of Brest is a shallow (mean depth 8 m) macrotidal
coastal system. Less than 50% of the bay is deeper than 5 m and, as
the tide can rise and fall by as much as 8 m, a very large intertidal
surface of substrate is available for potential colonisation by oysters.
Oysters were introduced into the Bay of Brest at the beginning of the
seventies but the invasion did not start until the nineties and
massive spread has only been observed since 2000. In 2005, this
colonised surface was estimated at 3 km2 with a mean oyster
density of 84 individuals m−2 (Lejart and Hily, 2005). Hard and soft
sustrate are both colonised. As oyster larvae need a support to settle,
pebbles and shells existing on mudflat were used by the first
individuals to arrive. This phenomenon has been also seen by Troost
(2010). Then, as C.gigas settles preferentially on conspecifics rather
than on any other substrate (Diederich, 2005), reefs developed
progressively.
Sampling was done in January 2006. Two sampling sites were
chosen in sheltered areas in the South-East of the bay, near the
Aulne estuary (Fig. 1), where oyster reefs had formed on natural
rocks (“rock” at Pointe du Château…) and on mud (“mud” at Faou
river). Both study sites were at the same tidal elevation, with a
mean low tide exposure time of about 4 h per tidal cycle. In the area
we find a salinity of ~34 psu and an average temperature of 13.6 °C
(2003–2006, SOMLIT, INSU-CNRS). These parameters are the same
for the both sites because of a tidal range of 8 m, 40% of the total
volume of the bay are mixed every day. In the Bay of Brest, rocks are
dominated by barnacles, and mussels are present at very low
abundance.
2.2. Field sampling
Mud: five 1000 cm2 samples of oyster reefs colonising the mud of
the Faou river (Fig. 2) were taken randomly. For each 1000 cm2
sample, the matter composing the reef (oysters and trapped
sediment) was collected and placed in plastic bags. At each sampling
position, three cores (11.2 cm diameter) of the underlying sediment
were taken down to a depth of 10 cm, sieved through 1 mmmesh size
and then placed in plastic bags for later species analysis. Two more
10 cm-deep cores (6 cm diameter) of the underlying sediment were
taken per sample and placed in plastic bags for later analyses of
organic matter content and the sediment particle size.
For comparison with uncolonised habitat, five 1000 cm2 samples
of bare mud close to the reef (2–3 m) were randomly sampled. Five
cores were taken at each sampling position, three for species analysis
and two for sediment analysis using the same sampling procedure as
for sediment underlying the reefs.
Rock: hard substrate samples were taken on the rocky shore at the
Pointe du Château (Fig. 2). Five 1000 cm2 samples of oyster reef
(oysters and trapped sediment) and five 1000 cm2 samples of
epifauna from bare rock; all samples were placed in plastic bags.
2.3. Laboratory measurements
On our return to the laboratory, each reef sample was gently
washed and sieved through 1 mm mesh for infaunal organisms. The
sediment trapped between shells was not preserved. To characterize
the reef habitat structure, we measured the following parameters for
each reef sample (including live and dead oysters): fresh weight,
water displacement volume and developed surface. Developed
surface was quantified by covering the whole surface of the reef
sample, including the interior surfaces of the larger crevices, with
pieces of fine paper of known area. This parameter is an expression of
the surface available for sessile epibenthic species. All samples were
then frozen. Epibionts (barnacles and worms) were detached from
oyster shells and all individuals found in reefs, bare rock epifaunal and
mud infaunal samples were identified to species level (except
nemerteans and oligochaetes). Encrusting animals (sponges, bryozoans
and colonial ascidians) were not considered in this study because
they could not be individually counted and weighted. For each
sample, individuals were pooled by trophic group and weighed (Ash
Free Dry Weight; AFDW) after drying and combusting in a fumace
using standard methods. For mud infaunal samples, where biomass
was low, the five replicates were pooled. For the sediment samples
organic matter content (%) was calculated from the differences
between dry weight (48 h at 60 °C) and AFDW in each core sample.
Particle size analysis was made on a 13 Afnor sieve series (10 000 to
63 μ).
2.4. Data analysis
2.4.1. Statistical analysis
ANOVA was used to compare macrofaunal abundance and species
richness between muddy and rocky substrate and between substrate
and reefs. Student t-tests were used to compare surface, volume, fresh
weight between reefs on the two substrates, and organic matter
content. A Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to compare particle
size distribution between bare sediment and sediment under reef.
Analyses were performed using Statgraphics Plus 5.1 statistics
software.
Multivariate analysis was performed to compare reef communities
of the two substrates, using PRIMER v6 software. Bray–Curtis
similarity coefficients of macrofaunal samples were calculated based
on fourth-root transformed abundance data. Coefficients were then
used to classify samples by similarity in a hierarchical cluster
analysis.
2.4.2. Ecological group and biotic coefficient
As stated in Hily (1984), soft-bottom macrofauna can be classified
into five ecological groups, according to their sensitivity to an
increasing stress gradient of organic matter enrichment:
Group I. Very sensitive species
Group II. Indifferent species
Group III. Tolerant species
Group IV. Second-order opportunistic species
Group V. First-order opportunistic species
Here we used the percentages of abundance of each ecological
group, to obtain the biotic coefficient (BC or AMBI) as defined by Borja
et al. (2000). This continuous coefficient was used in the present study
to compare patterns of macrofauna between sediment under reefs
and neighbouring sediment without any reef development.


xresults
3.1. Habitat properties
3.1.1. Sediment organic matter content and particle size analysis
There was no significant difference between the level of organic
matter found in bare mud (4.9%, SD=0.5) and the level found in mud
from under oyster reefs (5.47%, SD=0.47). Particle size analysis also
showed no significant difference between bare mud and mud under
oyster reefs (Fig. 3). Oysters seemed to reduce the proportion of very
fine particles (b63 μm) and to increase the proportion of very large
particles (N1250 μm), but these differences were not statistically
significant.
3.1.2. Physical characteristics of oyster reefs
In terms of surface, volume and fresh weight, results showed no
significant difference between the reefs that had developed on soft
and hard substrate (Fig. 4; t-test pN0.1). The surface available for
epibenthic species was increased by a factor of 4 when oysters had
colonised the substrate (Fig. 4A). For 1 m2 of colonised substrate, the
reef added 3.87 m2 (SD=0.94) on soft sediment and 3.97 m2
(SD=1.89) on rock. Reef volumes were 21.62 L m−2 (SD=4.66) on
soft sediment and 25.93 Lm−2 (SD=6.67) on rock (Fig. 4B) and
corresponded to 33.65 kg m−2 (SD=5.34) and 39.51 kg m−2
(SD=7.96), respectively (Fig. 4C), including the shells of both dead
and living oysters.
3.2. Macrofauna analyses
(nb: C. gigas was excluded from the analysis of the associated
macrofauna)
3.2.1. Abundance
Macrofaunal abundance was 3 times higher in the mud under
oyster reefs (Mean=1182, SD=503) than in bare mud (Mean=368,
SD=171) (Fig. 5). This ratio reached 20 when we compared the total
macrofaunal abundance of the new habitat, including both the reef
and the sediment beneath it (Mean=7409, SD=3860), with bare
mud. Compared to bare rock (Mean=5686, SD=3203), abundance
increased by a factor of 5 when oyster reefs were present
(Mean=26074, SD=4551) (Fig. 5). Due to barnacles (Table 1),
which need hard substrate to settle, macrofaunal abundance on bare
rocks was more than 15 times higher than in bare mud.
This trend between hard and soft substrate was the same but less
pronounced in the reefs. Macrofaunal abundance was more than 3
times higher in reefs present on rocks than those on mud. Barnacles
were the most abundant species on reefs on both rock and mud.
3.2.2. Species richness
On mud, the presence of an oyster reef significantly increased
species richness in the mud (pb0.0001); 20 (Mean=7.2, SD=3.4)
species were found in bare mud while 34 (Mean=13.4, SD=4.9)
were found in mud under oyster reefs (Fig. 6, Table 1). In the reef
samples themselves, 60 (Mean=39.6, SD=4) species were found.
This trend is reflected at a higher level of classification. Mud under
oyster reefs contained a larger number of different taxonomic groups
than bare mud (10 and 7, respectively) (Fig. 6). Proportions of
molluscs (21% and 21% respectively), crustaceans (12% and 10%,
respectively) and annelids (57% and 54% respectively) remained
unchanged. In reefs on mud, 14 taxonomic groups were found, and
proportions of molluscs (36%), crustaceans (19%): exclusive occurrence
of barnacles, isopods and more amphipods, and annelids (32%)
were different from those found in bare mud.
On rock, 10 (Mean=5.4, SD=1.7) species were found on bare
rock while 55 (Mean=33, SD=2.3) species were found on the reef
(Fig. 6, Table 1). Higher taxa were more diverse on the reef (13) than
on bare rock (5) (Fig. 6). In a similar way to the situation seen on the
muddy shore, proportions of molluscs (50%), crustaceans (20%), and
annelids (30%) on bare rocks were different
3.2.3. Community composition
3.2.3.1. Comparison of community composition. Even though the
physical characteristics of oyster reefs on soft and hard substrate
seem similar, their macrofauna showed only 11 species in common
(Table 1): corresponding to 17.5% and 20% of the total species present
on reefs over mud and rock respectively. The dendrogram resulting
from hierarchical classification analysis (Fig. 7) confirms that
macrofaunal assemblages were markedly different between the two
reefs. Of the species present in the reefs formed on mud, 41% were
characteristic of rocky substrate habitat. Conversely, only 16% of the
species present in the reefs on rock were characteristic of soft
sediment habitat (Table 1).
3.2.3.2. Trophic groups. In bare mud, suspension feeders (2.16 g m−2)
were themost abundant trophic group in terms of biomass, followed by
carnivores (1.22 g m−2) (Table 2). As for abundance and species
richness, the biomass was double in the mud under reefs (7.84 g m−2)
compared with bare mud (3.38 g m−2). In the mud under reefs,
carnivores were dominant (5.03 g m−2), followed by micrograzers
(1.81 gm−2) and deposit feeders (0.25 g m−2). Biomass of suspension
feederswas, however, hugely reduced. Carnivoreswere highly dominant
on reefs (Mean: 13.81 g m−2, SD: 8.82 g m−2), followed by deposit
feeders (Mean: 4.49 g m−2, SD: 2.89 g m−2). Suspension feeders,
micrograzers and detritus feeders were also present on reefs, but in
lesser biomass than carnivores and deposit feeders.
On bare rocks, micrograzers were largely dominant (Mean:
13.80 g m−2, SD: 3.95gm−2), with suspension feeders (Mean:
1.58 g m−2, SD: 1.40 g m−2) and carnivores (Mean: 0.51 g m−2, SD:
0.57 g m−2) representing a low biomass. Biomass was significantly
higher on oyster reefs over rock (Mean: 24.15 g m−2, SD: 4.50 g m−2)
than on bare rock (Mean: 15.89 g m−2, SD: 5.34 g m−2). Micrograzers
were the highly dominant trophic group (Mean: 13.67 g m−2, SD:
4.28 g m−2) (Table 2), followed by suspension feeders (Mean:
3.87 g m−2, SD: 1.22 g m−2) and carnivores (Mean: 3.12 g m−2, SD:
1.48 g m−2). Deposit and detritus feeders occurred only on oyster
reefs and not on bare rock.
3.2.3.3. Ecological groups. In bare mud, the most abundant group was
group II (Fig. 8), followed by group I and IV. Biotic coefficient (BC) was
1.5 (SD=0.4), a value which corresponds to a slightly polluted level
with an unbalanced benthic community. Under reefs, group IV was
largely dominant but group I was still present in a higher proportion
than groups II and III. Group V was present on reefs, corresponding to
the presence of the polychaete Capitella capitata (Table 1). Under
reefs, BC was 3.3 (SD=0.2) and therefore higher than in bare mud.
This increase in coefficient corresponds to a slight increase in organic
enrichment that reaches the value just between the slightly polluted
and the meanly polluted level.

xdiscussion
4.1. Crassostrea gigas: an ecosystem engineer
After more than 30 years of introduction in France, our study was
the first to explore the response of the benthic macrofauna to the
spread of C. gigas in Brittany. Thus we have seen that oysters
drastically change the physical characteristics of both soft and hard
substrates when oyster colonisation results in reef formation. C. gigas
creates a more complex 3D habitat structure on these substrates and
increases the surface available for epifauna and algae by a factor of 4.
By modifying the initial physical environment and creating a new
habitat that can be used by other species, C. gigas can be defined as an
ecosystem engineer (Kochmann et al., 2008; Markert et al., 2010) as
described by Jones et al. (1994, 1997): “physical ecosystem engineers
are organisms that directly or indirectly control the availability of
resources to other organisms by causing physical state changes in
biotic or abiotic materials. Physical ecosystem engineering by
organisms is the physical modification, maintenance, or creation of
habitats. The ecological effects of engineering on other species occur
because the physical state changes directly or indirectly control
resources used by other species”. Crooks (2002) showed that many of
today's ecosystem engineers are exotic species like C. gigas. The role of
the Pacific oyster as an ecosystem engineer is much more pronounced
on soft sediment because hard substrate is built where it was initially
rare. The physical characteristics of oyster reefs tend to be the same
whatever the underlying substrate, as though the physical structure of
C. gigas reef was intrinsically determined. C. gigas can also be defined
as an autogenic engineer, as the organisms themselves are part of the
engineered habitat (Jones et al., 1994, 1997). By creating their own
reefs, C. gigas shell aggregations introduce complexity and heterogeneity
into benthic environments and are thus important elements of
habitat structure affecting community- and ecosystem-level processes
(Simenstad and Fresh, 1995; Gutierrez et al., 2003).
4.2. Benthic macrofaunal responses to the formation of oyster reefs
Macrofaunal analysis showed that abundance and species richness
were higher on reefs than on bare substrate (Figs. 5–6). Equivalent
patterns have already been found on wild oyster beds (Escapa et al.,
2004; Markert et al., 2010), on experimental designed oyster beds
(Kochmann et al., 2008), on cultivated oyster beds (Hosack et al.,
2006, Kelly et al., 2008), and are well known in C. virginica reefs (Coen
and Luckenbach, 2000; Meyer and Townsend, 2000; Grabowski et al.,
2005; Shervette and Gelwick, 2008). Increases in abundance can
partly be explained by the increased available surface (Fig. 4) to which
macrofauna can attach (Dumbauld et al., 2001). This effect is further
enhanced by the fact that C. gigas produces large ornamented shells
that are known to support more individuals of fouling species than do
small shells (Creed, 2000; Gutierrez et al., 2003). The fact that overall
macrofaunal abundance was more than 3 times higher in reefs
present on rocks than those on mud could be explained by barnacle
sensitivity. Barnacles were the most abundant species on reefs both
over rock and mud, but studies have shown that the proximity of
muddy sediment reduced barnacle settlement and survival (Silina,
2002). Another hypothesis is that when oysters colonise the tidal
zone, they can be considered as a clean substrate, free from epibiotic
macrofauna. To colonise this new habitat, epibionts can either spread
from the substrate around or under the reef or their larvae can settle
on the reef. This is probably why abundance was higher on reefs
formed on rock than those formed on mud. Indeed, as the species that
lived on the reefs were mostly those characteristic of a rocky
substrate, to colonise reefs on rock they could have arrived by
migration and settlement, whereas the species that colonised reefs on
mud they relied exclusively on larvae settlement. This phenomenon is
much more pronounced for young reefs, such as those in the Bay of
Brest, than it is for older ones.
Species richness was higher in mud under reefs than in bare mud,
and higher on reefs than on bare substrate for the two types of habitat.
There was also greater diversity at a higher level of classification,
which confirmed a biodiversification. Reefs provide an increased
surface for macrofauna and also provide various microhabitats that
are different from the usual native habitat of bare mud and rocks
(Lohse, 1993). The provision of diversified microhabitats and
sediment caught up among C. gigas shells (Markert et al., 2010),
may explain the presence of mud species like Amaeana trilobata or
Chaetozone setosa (infaunal polychaetes) in the reefs that colonised
rocks.
An important result was that macrofaunal abundance increased
under reefs compared with bare mud. In the case of cultivated oyster
beds, Castel et al. (1989) suggested that this increase was due to
oyster biodeposits, which provide increased food resources for fauna.
A way to detect organic enrichment in soft sediment communities
is to use ecological groups (Hily, 1984) and the Biotic Coefficient
(Borja et al., 2000). In bare mud, the BC value of 1.5 (SD=0.4)
corresponded to slightly polluted conditions with an unbalanced
benthic community. This value is the most common value found in
European estuarine and coastal environments (Borja et al., 2000).
Even though oyster reefs increased BC in the sediment (3.3; SD=0.2),
this corresponded to the lower value of meanly enriched conditions.
This increase in BC may indicate lower oxygenation conditions rather
than an organic enrichment. Indeed, sediment under a reef is more
confined than in bare mud, and water circulation and therefore
oxygenation is probably reduced. This hypothesis is supported by the
organic matter and particle size analysis. No organic or silt enrichment
was measured in the mud beneath the reef. We know that oysters
produce a large amount of biodeposits (Haven and Morales-Alamo,
1966; Razet et al., 1990; Hayakawa et al., 2001), but these are
probably washed away from the area every day by the powerful tide,
currents and waves. Therefore at this step of the invasion, effects of
organic enrichment by oyster biodeposits on intertidal communities
remain weak in the vicinity of the oyster reefs. The mass of
biodeposits washed away from the reefs could sediment in areas
further away and, on a larger scale, could contribute to the overall
increase of the mud fraction in coastal sediments.
Phyla representation gave another kind of information on the
impact of C. gigas on intertidal communities. In soft sediment, reefs
had no effect on higher taxa composition. Indeed proportions of
molluscs, crustaceans and annelids in the mud remained the same
whether or not a reef had developed above them. However, the new
habitat was composed of both the mud and the reef above, and
proportions of higher taxa in the reef were quite different from those
in the sediment. The proportion of annelids was lower, with relatively
more molluscs and crustaceans. Proportions of taxa in the new habitat
as a whole, had therefore changed. Bare rock was largely dominated
by molluscs, primarily gastropods. Despite of a higher diversity of
gastropods and the exclusive occurrence of bivalves, proportion of
molluscs in reefs on rock was lower while crustaceans gained in
importance due to the exclusive occurrence of isopods and amphipods.
Therefore proportion of crustaceans increased in both reef types
whereas molluscs showed contrasting trends with an increase in reef
on mud and decrease in reef on rock. This could be explained by the
fact that the proportion of annelids was the same between bare rock
communities and oyster reefs. Hence, oyster reefs have an effect on
the taxonomic composition of the community.
Impacts of oyster reefs can also be studied from a more functional
point of view, for example in terms of community trophic group
analysis. Biomass of bare mud was dominated by suspension feeders,
consisted to a smaller degree of carnivores and deposit feeders were
of minor importance. When mud was colonised by oysters, biomass of
mud under reefs increased with all trophic groups being present.
Carnivores became largely dominant whereas the proportion of
suspension feeders decreased dramatically. In the reefs themselves,
biomass increased to a large extent with carnivores remaining largely
dominant, followed by deposit feeders that colonise the sediment
trapped among oysters and suspension feeders were low in biomass.
These results correspond to the findings of Markert et al. (2010)
which revealed a new dominance of carnivores due to an increase in
habitat complexity after the transformation of blue mussel beds into
oyster reefs. Reef building therefore modified the trophic composition
of the intertidal communities in the Bay of Brest by providing habitat
properties to species of all trophic groups.
On rock, reefs increased macrofaunal biomass but proportions of
the trophic groups changed, promoting the presence of carnivores like
Carcinus maenas in both habitats. In accordance with our results,
Escapa et al. (2004) showed in Northern Patagonia, that the densities
of the larger native intertidal crab Cyrtograpsus angulatus, a predator,
were higher inside oyster beds than on bare rock.
Micrograzers were dominant on bare rocks as well as on reef but
the increase of carnivores and suspension feeders and the appearance
of deposit and detritic feeders would reveal that the formation
of reefs on rock as on mud led in both cases to a more balanced
distribution of trophic groups. Compared to bare substrate, reefs on
rock increased macrofaunal biomass but to a smaller amount as on
mud.
These results should be considered cautiously because they only
concern associated macrofauna. We must not lose sight of the fact that
the majority of the new biocoenosis biomass consists of oysters,
meaning that this new biocoenosis is in fact dominated by suspension
feeders on both habitats.
4.3. The larger spatial scale
We finally asked whether colonisation of all substrates of the
intertidal shore by oyster reefs would result in a large scale
uniformisation of biodiversity. Indeed we previously saw that mud
specific species colonised reef on rocky shore where they had initially
been absent and that rock specific species colonised reefs on mud. Our
results showed that 38% of the species present in the reefs on mud
were characteristic of rocky substrate habitat and only 15% of the
species present in the reefs on rock were characteristic of mud habitat
(Table 1). The majority of the muddy reef community was composed
of mud specific species and the majority of the rocky reef community
was composed of hard substrate specific species. Furthermore, even
though physical characteristics of oyster reefs on soft and hard
substrate seemed to be similar, they had only 11 species in common
(out of 123 identified, Table 1). The dendrogram confirmed that
macrofauna assemblages were markedly different between the two
reefs. This difference may decrease as these reefs age, as colonisation
of the reefs on mud by species characteristic of rocky substrate takes
longer and is much more difficult than colonisation of reefs on rock
because migration from adjacent substrate is not possible. On a more
functional level, analysis of trophic groups also showed that the rocky
reef community is dominated by micrograzers, while the community
of reefs on mud is dominated by carnivores. Oyster reefs can invade
the intertidal shore and, for the moment, their communities seem to
have conserved the characteristics of their original native habitat. On a
larger scale, because oyster reefs act mainly as a habitat creating
shelter and substrate for the local species, the species composition of
the associated communities will vary according to the variability of
the local set of species present in the environment. Consequently
there is no reason (and our personal observations confirm this) that
the β biodiversity should change when oyster reefs develop.
4.4. Management aspects
Today, the invasion of the coasts of Brittany by C. gigas is a very
complex problem. On one hand, like all invasive species, C. gigas can
have undesirable effects on native intertidal communities. Previous
studies have shown major effects on valuable native habitats like
seagrass (Kelly et al., 2008) or Sabellaria alveolata reefs (Cognie et al.,
2006). On the other hand, Markert et al. (2010) found a higher
biodiversity in Crassostrea-reefs than in Mytilus-beds in the intertidal
of the Wadden Sea. Our study showed that C. gigas increased as well
intertidal biodiversity of more simple communities. In addition, C.
gigas has become a common species on Brittany coasts. The situation
is exactly the opposite to that of C. virginica reefs in estuaries on the
Atlantic Coast of the United States. Oyster reefs of C. virginica, are
recognised as a valuable habitat that should be restored and protected
from overfishing (Coen and Luckenbach, 2000; Peterson et al., 2003;
Rodney and Paynter, 2006). C. virginica reefs are a native habitat
exploited by man and are known to play multiple roles in the
estuarine ecosystem (Ruesink et al., 2005): as a habitat for sessile and
mobile invertebrates because they provide refuge, attachment
surfaces and populations of prey; by influencing the flow of water
within estuaries; by modifying patterns of sedimentation deposition,
consolidation and stabilization; and by filtering large volumes of
water. Although C.virginica reefs have been degraded and reduced in
size by destructive harvesting practices, the value of this habitat is
now recognised, leading to protection and restoration programs. The
first difference with the situation in France is that C. gigas is an exotic
species. The second is that, even though it is a cultivated species, the
reefs are not exploited. C. gigas reefs therefore seem to be drastically
changing the landscape of the Brittany shoreline, but do not yet have
any commercial value. However, this situation will probably change
following a mass mortality episode of cultivated oysters in summer
2008 and 2009. Survival rate of wild oysters was found to be better
than exploited stocks, so a decree was made to protect wild
populations from potential non-professional exploitation so as to
supply wild spat for cultivation.
Wild populations are therefore progressively becoming a valuable
resource as well as a new habitat. Overall, more studies will be needed
to fully assess the impact that these reefs can have on native
ecosystems and particularly on sites of nature conservation interest.