xabstract
The introduction of exotic fishes to naturally fishless waters is often associated with declines in species native to those waters.
Mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis, have been introduced to waters worldwide for mosquito control. Taxa negatively affected by
mosquitofish potentially include fairy shrimp (Crustacea: Anostraca) that often show high rates of endemism, and which are
characteristic of naturally fishless wetlands on every continent. We tested the effects of mosquitofish on a fairy shrimp, Linderiella
occidentalis, in experimental ponds that included a community of native aquatic invertebrates. We supplemented field experiments
with lab trials to test whether mosquitofish preferred L. occidentalis to other prey. Survival of the fairy shrimp was significantly
reduced in ponds with mosquitofish. Only 16.9% of fairy shrimp survived in ponds with mosquitofish, while 64.0% survived in
control ponds. Fish presence also reduced abundance and biomass of other invertebrates. Results from feeding trials demonstrated
that mosquitofish frequently prefer L. occidentalis to alternative prey. Our results suggest that introduction of mosquitofish into
naturally fishless wetlands may lead to loss of diversity of their highly specialized aquatic fauna.

xintroduction
Biological invasions have long been recognized as a
threat to the biodiversity of freshwater systems (Elton,
1958). The effects of non-indigenous introductions on
riverine and large lake systems are well documented
(Kolar and Lodge, 2000); however, temporary and
permanent wetlands that are either remote (mountain
lakes and pools) or geographically isolated from river
systems (including playa lakes, woodland pools, prairie
potholes, and vernal pools) have not been as well studied
(Bahls, 1992; King et al., 1996; Tiner et al., 2002).
Changes in the biota of these systems may go unnoticed
(Mura, 2001). These waters are most often naturally
fishless (Stoddard, 1987; Bahls, 1992; Tiner et al., 2002).
Worldwide, such geographically isolated wetlands provide
habitat for specialized native crustaceans, including
over 250 species of Anostraca, the fairy shrimps (Brtek
and Mura, 2000). These wetlands are extremely important
to amphibians and to migratory birds that rely on
the abundant macroinvertebrates for nourishment (see
review in Tiner et al., 2002).
Exotic fishes have been intentionally introduced
throughout the world for sport fishing, for ornamental
purposes, and as biological control agents (Taylor et al.,
1984). Introduced fish may spread to additional waters
and have been known to eliminate or greatly reduce
native fauna through competition or predation (Moyle
et al., 1986). Despite biodiversity concerns, however,
intentional fish stocking is still increasing globally
(Kolar and Lodge, 2000). In naturally fishless waters,
the effects of non-indigenous fish may be especially
pronounced and such introductions have been correlated
with declines of a variety of invertebrates and
amphibians indigenous to those systems (Stoddard,
1987; Fisher and Shaffer, 1996; Gamradt and Kats,
1996; Parker et al., 1996; Englund, 1999; Knapp and
Matthews, 2000; Hamer et al., 2002). Although the impacts
of fish on natural systems often seem apparent in
surveys, correlative field studies do not establish a causal
relationship for population declines. Stronger evidence
is usually needed to convince policy makers and resource
managers that fish introductions are responsible
for losses of native species. We present here a replicated
experiment designed to quantify effects of a widely introduced
fish on a species of fairy shrimp, which are
typical of many fishless wetlands worldwide.
The western mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis, is a small
fish native to the southeastern United States. In the past
century this species, and its congener, the eastern mosquitofish,
Gambusia holbrooki, have been stocked in
both permanent and temporary waters throughout the
world for mosquito control (Duryea et al., 1996;
Swanson et al., 1996). Mosquitofish have a variety of
biological attributes typical of successful invaders and
have expanded their range to include a diversity of
habitats worldwide (Courtney and Meffe, 1989; Englund,
1999; Hamer et al., 2002). Mosquitofish are opportunistic
omnivores; in addition to preying on
mosquito larvae, their diet includes algae, crustaceans,
insects, and vertebrates, including amphibian larvae and
small fishes (see review in Swanson et al., 1996). Mosquitofish
attack most potential prey encountered; prey
preference may be due to a variety of factors including
fish size and the size, abundance and activity of potential
prey (Linden and Cech, 1990; Swanson et al., 1996).
Introduced mosquitofish can substantially reduce zooplankton
populations and shift size frequencies of remaining
populations through selective predation on
larger individuals (Hurlbert and Mulla, 1981). Although
such results provide empirical evidence of zooplankton
vulnerability to mosquitofish, no one has shown whether
mosquitofish reduce abundance of anostracans when
zooplankton and other invertebrates are present.
The order Anostraca is one of four primitive orders
of phyllopodous branchiopods that are found only in
continental waters (Dodson and Frey, 2001; Smith,
2001). Due to the large size of most species, anostracans
are among the most conspicuous of the specialized invertebrate
fauna characteristic of fishless wetlands
(Banarescu, 1990; Eng et al., 1990; King et al., 1996;
Simovich, 1998). Anostracans occur on every continent
and many oceanic islands (Belk and Brtek, 1995; Brtek
and Mura, 2000). At present 27 genera are known to
inhabit temporary pools, and seasonally fluctuating,
permanent lakes and ponds (Belk, 1981; Belk and Brtek,
1995; Brtek and Mura, 2000). They are found in such
varied habitats as astatic waters in river floodplains, rice
fields, rock and prairie pools, and deep mountain lakes
(Eder et al., 1997; Brtek and Mura, 2000; Mura and
Takami, 2000; Mura, 2001; Smith, 2001). Some species
are often extremely abundant in waters where found,
while other species are typically rare (Eng et al., 1990).
Species also exhibit clear differences in timing of
seasonal occurrence (Eder et al., 1997). They are rarely
present in waters with carnivorous fishes (Kerfoot and
Lynch, 1987; Smith, 2001). Genera frequently exhibit a
substantial degree of speciation and endemism at the
local and regional level (Keeley and Zedler, 1998; Smith,
2001). In the past, documentation of branchiopod distributions
has been fragmentary in much of the world,
but surveys of the fishless wetlands in which they are
found have greatly increased in recent years (Eder et al.,
1997; Mura and Takami, 2000; Naganawa and Orgiljanova,
2000). A survey of publications listed in the
BIOSIS database shows the description of 4 new genera
and 12 new species in the last 10 years (Fugate, 1993;
Thiery and Fugate, 1994; Vekhoff, 1998; Belk and Fugate,
2000; Brtek and Mura, 2000; Naganawa and Orgiljanova,
2000; Sanoamuang et al., 2000; Rogers and
Fugate, 2001; Timms, 2001; Naganawa and Zagas,
2002; Obregon-Barboza et al., 2002).
We tested the effect of the mosquitofish on a fairy
shrimp, the California linderiella, Linderiella occidentalis,
in a replicated field study using six experimental
ponds. L. occidentalis is one of nine anostracan species
endemic to California vernal pools (Eriksen and Belk,
1999). L. occidentalis frequently co-occurs in pool
complexes with three fairy shrimp protected under the
Endangered Species Act: Branchinecta lynchi (threatened),
B. conservatio (endangered), and B. longiantenna
(endangered) (Eng et al., 1990; Federal Register, 1994;
Helm, 1998; Eriksen and Belk, 1999). L. occidentalis is
similar in behavior to these and other anostracans, and
so may serve as a suitable indicator of G. affinis effects
on other fairy shrimp species.
Fairy shrimp and other phyllopods are not considered
important in the diets of fish because they generally
occur in bodies of water that do not naturally support
fish (Smith, 2001). Likewise, fish predation has seldom
been considered a factor in their persistence (Eng et al.,
1990; King et al., 1996; but see Federal Register, 1994).
Fishless waters including vernal pools, however, have
been considered potential mosquito breeding sources
and possible public health hazards (Bohart and Washino,
1978; Wright, 1991; Federal Register, 1994; Duryea
et al., 1996). In the United States, mosquito control
practices have included stocking mosquitofish in fishless
wetlands, including vernal and woodland pools (Federal
Register, 1994; Duryea et al., 1996). Fish may also be
washed into these wetlands from permanent waters
during floods (Smith, 2001).
Mosquitofish have been suggested as possible factors
in the declines of vernal pool fauna in California
(Shaffer et al., 1993) where surveys suggested an inverse
relationship between presence of vernal pool species and
introduced vertebrate predators, including mosquitofish.
However, because the various introduced predators often
co-occurred in ponds, the authors were not able to
calculate an unconfounded correlation between mosquitofish
and vernal pool species. The survey results
indicated a need to complete manipulative experiments
to test whether mosquitofish presence alone might
lead to changes in species diversity in vernal pool
communities.
To our knowledge mosquitofish effects on fairy
shrimp have not been quantified in a controlled and
replicated experiment. We were asked to help resolve
questions about the effect of mosquitofish on native
vernal pools species (personal communication, Peter
Ghormley, North Salinas Valley Mosquito Abatement
District). In addition to testing whether mosquitofish
reduced fairy shrimp survival, we also tested their effects
on the total invertebrate community. We supplemented
the field experiment with laboratory experiments to help
identify an explanatory mechanism for field results.

xmethods
2.1. Field experiment
We conducted the field study in six 3.05 m6.1 m
rectangular ponds located at the White Slough Mosquitofish
Rearing Facility near Lodi, San Joaquin
County, California. The ponds were arranged in one
row of six ponds. To intersperse treatments (Hurlbert,
1984) we alternated treatment and control ponds after
randomly selecting the treatment for pond 1. We lined
each pond with polyethylene sheeting and placed soil
over the lining. Ponds sloped gradually at one end to a
maximum depth of approximately 60 cm. Each pond
was surrounded by a fence of aluminum flashing that
extended approximately 20 cm below the soil surface
and was 30 cm high. The flashing served as a deterrent
to non-native crayfish and small terrestrial animals;
however, the ponds were open to large terrestrial vertebrates,
to birds, and to colonization by flying aquatic
insects. In December 1997, the ponds were filled with
untreated well water. Frequent rains and a back up
float-valve irrigation system maintained water levels
throughout the experiment. Pond basins lacked vegetation
and remained turbid for the duration of the
experiment.
On December 30, we inoculated all experimental
ponds with 1.2 L of concentrated pond water containing
zooplankton from roadside ditches and temporary pools
in vernal pool habitat. We collected zooplankton from
locations without fairy shrimp. We added additional
inoculations of concentrated temporary pool zooplankton
on January 24 (1.6 L) and January 30 (1.2 L).
On each date, collections from source ponds were
pooled before being equally distributed among all experimental
ponds.
We collected L. occidentalis from roadside ditches
and vernal pools in southern Sacramento and San Joaquin
Counties, California. We obtained mosquitofish
from fish rearing ponds at the mosquitofish rearing facility.
On January 24, 1998, we stocked each experimental
pond with 300 L. occidentalis (total length:
mean¼9.64 mm, SD¼0.44). We added 12 adult mosquitofish,
including at least 2 males, (total length:
mean¼34.33 mm, SD¼3.78) to each of three (treatment)
ponds. Our use of 12 fish is within the density
range that might be added to pools where fairy shrimp
occur. California mosquito control districts often stock
mosquitofish at a rate of 0.56–1.68 kg/ha in lakes,
streams and marshes (Downs, 1991), which would provide
an experimental pond density of 7–22 fish.
We added 250 additional L. occidentalis (total length:
mean¼6.82 mm, SD¼1.61) to each pond on January
31, and a final 50 L. occidentalis on February 12. L.
occidentalis in our ponds had a maximum density of 129/
m3. Densities of fairy shrimp in natural pools vary
widely; surveys of vernal pools with L. occidentalis
provide estimated densities of 9–300,000/m3 (King,
Simovich and Brusca, unpublished data). Anostraca
have an annual life cycle and many species, including L.
occidentalis, produce only resting eggs, or cysts, that
hatch when pool substrates are re-hydrated with the
return of seasonal rains (Smith, 2001), so successive
additions of fairy shrimp simulated natural variation in
egg hatch that occurs as pools fill.
On March 3, we seined each pond 3 times with a 3.2
mm mesh seine to count the L. occidentalis before they
began to senesce. We also captured and counted surviving
fish. We did not detect any mosquitofish recruitment
during the period of the experiment, and all
but 2 adult fish survived.
On March 5, we sampled ponds for aquatic insects
using a rectangular handnet frame (24.5 cm17.5 cm)
fitted with 0.35 mm mesh silk netting. We drew the
net along the subsurface for 1 m so that the top 1 cm
(approx.) of substrate was sampled, along with the
overlying water. We collected a sweep from each of three
sides of each pond, pooled the sweep contents for each
pond, placed them in 70% alcohol, and transported
them to the lab where the insects in each sample were
counted.We recorded insect biomass after drying insects
in an oven at 55 C until at stable weight (measured to
0.0001 g).
We collected zooplankton samples with the same net
used for insects. We made five 1 m draws through the
water, two at and three below the water surface. Each
tow was drawn from a different area of the pond and
these areas were consistent for all ponds. Zooplankton
tow samples were pooled for each pond. In the lab we
standardized each zooplankton sample volume at 50 ml,
then counted zooplankton (P1/2 mm total length) in five
1.0 ml subsamples to determine averages per unit volume
for analysis.
We performed an arcsin-square-root transformation
on the proportion of L. occidentalis surviving, then used
analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test the primary hypothesis
that mosquitofish affected fairy shrimp survival
(Scheiner, 1993). We also compared data for other invertebrates
from treatment and control ponds. We log
transformed the invertebrate data (total insect numbers,
total insect biomass, and total zooplankton numbers)
then performed a MANOVA to determine mosquitofish
effects on these response variables. This analysis protects
the experimental error rate while allowing detection of
interactions among variables (Scheiner, 1993). We performed
analyses with the JMP IN 3.2.6 statistical
package (Sall and Lehman, 1996).
2.2. Lab experiments
We conducted feeding trials to test mosquitofish
preference for L. occidentalis versus alternative prey
species (Daphnia, mosquito larvae, copepods and corixids).
The laboratory experiments were conducted in
20.8 L aquaria that were opaque on three sides and
coated on the fourth side with one-way mirrored film.
The tanks were equipped with a plastic divider to separate
species before testing and were lit from above with
15 W fluorescent lights. The tanks had 1.5 cm deep
gravel substrates and were filled with spring water at
room temperature. Each tank contained one plastic
plant to provide cover.
We collected mosquitofish from White Slough fish
rearing ponds, then held them in a 75.7 L aquarium
filled with aerated spring water. Fish were fed ad-lib one
to two times daily (Tetra GuppyMin tropical flakes).We
obtained mosquito larvae from mosquito abatement
district facilities. We collected other invertebrates from
temporary pools in vernal pool habitat.
We conducted six trials for each prey combination. In
each trial, we placed a fish in an aquarium on one side of
the divider and 15 L. occidentalis plus 15 alternate prey
on the other side of the divider. After an acclimation
period of one hour, we removed the divider, and the fish
were allowed to feed until 30 minutes passed or half the
prey were consumed. We recorded the number of attacks
and predation events during each trial.
We conducted initial feeding preference trials in 1998.
All organisms were housed under ambient light conditions
in the lab. Fish were not fed during the 12 h prior
to lab experiments. We used only adult female fish that
were not visibly pregnant; each fish was used only once.
We compared mosquitofish preference for L. occidentalis
with preference for Daphnia, copepods, and mosquito
larvae (4th instar Ochlerotatus dorsalis). Size
measurements for fish and invertebrates are given in
Table 1. The total number of prey consumed per trial
was low, so in spring 1999 we performed additional
trials with fish that were starved longer.
In 1999, all organisms were held under a 12 h light/12 h
dark light cycle at 20.5 C. Fish were not fed for 24 h prior
to lab experiments. Set up of experimental aquaria was
the same as in 1998. We conducted tests comparing
mosquitofish preference for L. occidentalis with Daphnia,
mosquito larvae (4th instar Culex tarsalis), and corixids.
We compared mosquitofish preference for L. occidentalis
to preference for corixids because corixids were abundant
in vernal pools in the spring of 1999. We were unable to
locate sufficient copepods for our 1999 trials. Mean sizes
of L. occidentalis were smaller than in 1998, while mean
sizes of fish and Daphnia were larger (Table 1).
For each trial we summed the number of individuals
eaten and attacked. We analyzed totals using the v2 test
for goodness of fit (Sokal and Rohlf, 1995). Two trials in
which the fish neither ate nor attacked either prey were
excluded from the respective analyses. Total length
measurements were log transformed before comparison
of lengths by year.


xresults
3.1. Field experiment
Mosquitofish significantly reduced L. occidentalis
numbers in experimental ponds relative to control ponds
(F1;4 ¼ 12:13; P ¼ 0:0253). In the control ponds, 64%
(SD¼11.73%) of the fairy shrimp survived, while only
16.9% (SD¼10.86%) survived in ponds with fish.
Mosquitofish presence altered pond community
structure (statistics are presented in Table 2). The mean
biomass of aquatic insects sampled from ponds with fish
was 11% of the biomass from control ponds (control
mean¼0.0188 g, SD¼0.0089; fish mean¼0.0020 g,
SD¼0.0015). Fish reduced the mean abundance of
aquatic insects (Chironomidae, Corixidae, Coleoptera
and Notonectidae) in samples by 87% (control mean¼
160.00, SD¼174.85; fish mean¼20.33, SD¼13.01).
Chironomids comprised 85% of the insects collected in
substrate samples and total insect abundance reflected
the treatment difference in their numbers. Mean abundance
of zooplankton in samples from fish ponds was
88.87 (SD¼93.27) while in control pond samples it was
132.60 (SD¼16.92).
3.2. Lab experiment
Feeding trials indicated that mosquitofish readily feed
on L. occidentalis; however preference results were
mixed. In the 1998 trials, mosquitofish consumed more
L. occidentalis than Daphnia (X2
ð1Þ for goodness of
fit¼7.538, P < 0:01, Fig. 1A), but consumed more copepods
than L. occidentalis (X2
ð1Þ ¼ 10:756, P < 0:005,
Fig. 1C). We did not detect a difference in mosquitofish
consumption of L. occidentalis and O. dorsalis
(X2
ð1Þ ¼ 1:316, n.s., Fig. 1B). Total attacks (prey either
eaten or rejected) by mosquitofish indicated no detectable
difference between number of attacks on L. occidentalis
versus Daphnia (X2
ð1Þ ¼ 0:010, n.s., Fig. 1A) and
L. occidentalis versus O. dorsalis (X2
ð1Þ ¼ 3:5957, n.s.,
Fig. 1B). The total number of mosquitofish attacks on
copepods was significantly higher than the attacks on L.
occidentalis (X2
ð1Þ ¼ 73:8409, P < 0:001, Fig. 1C).
In the 1999 feeding trials, mosquitofish consumed L.
occidentalis in preference to alternative prey in all three
trials (L. occidentalis versus C. tarsalis: X2
ð1Þ for goodness
of fit¼27.94, P < 0:001, Fig. 1E; L. occidentalis versus
Daphnia: X2
ð1Þ ¼ 25:47, P < 0:001, Fig. 1D; L. occidentalis
versus corixids: X2
ð1Þ ¼ 36:75, P < 0:001, Fig. 1F). A
comparison of the total number of attacks by mosquitofish
indicated that mosquitofish attacked L. occidentalis
more often than either mosquito larvae (X2
ð1Þ ¼
25:09, P < 0:001, Fig. 1E) or corixids (X2
ð1Þ ¼ 25:14,
P ¼< 0:001, Fig. 1F), but attacked Daphnia and L. occidentalis
at indistinguishable rates (X2
ð1Þ ¼ 2:52, n.s.,
Fig. 1D). Fish often attacked Daphnia multiple times,
then rejected the prey.

xdiscussion
Our results provide empirical evidence that mosquitofish
can significantly reduce L. occidentalis abundance
in pool communities. The combination of field and lab
results strongly suggests that predation is the mechanism
by which fairy shrimp survivorship was reduced in
treatment ponds. Results from feeding trials demonstrate
that mosquitofish feed readily on L. occidentalis
when there are alternative prey available, but that
mosquitofish prey preference might be altered by the size
relationships of available prey and starvation levels of
fish. Although we cannot rule out the possibility that
there is simply a year effect in differences in prey preference
between 1998 and 1999, our interpretation is
consistent with work by Bence and Murdoch (1986) that
indicated that mosquitofish prey preference was affected
by fish size in relation to prey size and fish levels of
satiation. These lab results are also consistent with the
overall effect of mosquitofish on other experimental
pond invertebrates. Our ponds were stocked with zooplankton
from shallow pools and colonized by insect
taxa all commonly found co-occurring with anostracans.
A MANOVA indicated that mosquitofish affected the
structure of this community. The loss of insect biomass
between the control and treatment ponds was of greater
magnitude than the downward trend in insect numbers,
suggesting that mosquitofish were preying preferentially
on larger individuals.
Because mosquitofish are known to be visual predators
(Swanson et al., 1996), the magnitude of the reduction
in L. occidentalis abundance was surprising
given the low number of fish in each pond and the turbid
condition of the ponds during the experiment. Competition
is possible, but we think this is an unlikely
mechanism for reduction in L. occidentalis abundance
because these fairy shrimp feed primarily on bacteria,
bits of detritus, algae, and rotifers while mosquitofish
typically take the largest prey they are capable of consuming
(Swanson et al., 1996; Smith, 2001) and all fish
present were adults.
Our earthen experimental ponds minimized the variation
in pond size and depth that we would encounter if
we used natural pools. We were able to standardize not
only predator densities, but densities of focal prey, giving
us more statistical power. These model systems allow
a level of control and rigor that is generally not possible
in natural systems (Resetarits and Fauth, 1998). The
realism of experiments conducted in artificial ponds has
been challenged in the past, primarily as a result of high
densities of subject taxa used in the experiments (see
review in Resetarits and Fauth, 1998). However, Resetarits
and Fauth (1998) found that mesocosm experiments
could, when properly grounded in natural history,
successfully make specific predictions about the structure
and dynamics of natural pool communities.
We attempted to provide realistic conditions in our
experiments. L. occidentalis occur in widespread locations
throughout Californias Central Valley. They have
been collected from pools ranging in size from 1 m2 to
40 ha (Eng et al., 1990). Our experimental ponds were
located within the range of L. occidentalis and were
exposed to the same weather conditions as local vernal
pools. Branchiopods generally tolerate wide ranges in
temperature and pH, in keeping with fluctuating water
levels in natural pools (Smith, 2001). Our ponds were
within the depth and temperature ranges in which both
L. occidentalis and mosquitofish have been found in field
surveys (Shaffer et al., 1993; Gallagher, 1996; King et al.,
1996). Although the pH in our experimental ponds
ranged from 8.7 to 9.9 while surveys by Eng et al. (1990)
indicated L. occidentalis commonly occurred in poorly
buffered waters between 6.1 and 8.4 pH, it did not vary
by treatment (Students t test, df¼4, t¼0.878,
P ¼ 0:429). L. occidentalis occur in mildly tannic pools
with grass substrates and in turbid, mud-bottomed
pools like those we used. Experimental results could
differ in some pools if vegetative structure provides fairy
shrimp with refuge from mosquitofish.
Our initial densities of fairy shrimp were lower than
the densities of L. occidentalis in many natural pools;
however, densities were within the range of densities
encountered in the field (King, Simovich, and Brusca,
unpublished data). In addition, they are representative
of densities of other fairy shrimp species observed in a
variety of California habitats (Leyse, personal observations).
We introduced mosquitofish to our experimental
ponds based on standard stocking rates used by mosquito
control agencies. Our results may underestimate
fish effects because fish may be stocked at higher densities
in response to specific situations (Downs, 1991).
Higher densities may also occur when mosquitofish are
moved into new waters by floods, when pools do not dry
completely each year, or when fish breed (see review in
Swanson et al., 1996).
We do not mean to suggest that mosquitofish are
responsible for all known declines in fairy shrimp
abundance. In numerous areas of the world, loss of astatic
pool habitat due to land type conversion is recognized
as the primary threat to Anostraca species
persistence (Eng et al., 1990; Petrov and Petrov, 1997).
However, we wish to call attention to a possible threat
to species diversity in normally fishless wetlands that
may go unnoticed because knowledge about the aquatic
invertebrate fauna of these areas is imperfect (Mura,
2001) and many such wetlands are not characterized by
the specialized flora typical of Californias vernal pools.
In California, past mosquito control practices included
stocking mosquitofish in vernal pools (Federal
Register, 1994), but a brief survey of ‘‘mosquito and
vector control district’’ websites indicates that in recent
years some have modified their practices to protect
known protected species. However, even where districts
have modified their practices, fish are still often available
to the public for stocking. Mosquitofish now occur
worldwide and some countries may not yet have protected
endemic and rare species in fishless waters (Petrov
and Petrov, 1997). In some countries, species are in
danger of extinction (Maier, 1998; Samraoui, 2002). In
addition, it is apparent from the recent literature that
the discovery of new species is expanding (e.g., King et
al., 1996; Vekhoff, 1998; Belk and Fugate, 2000; Brtek
and Mura, 2000; Naganawa and Orgiljanova, 2000;
Sanoamuang et al., 2000; Timms, 2001; Naganawa and
Zagas, 2002; Obregon-Barboza et al., 2002). Therefore,
we believe it is important to quantify and publish effects
of introduced fish on formerly fishless communities.
More work is needed to determine whether measures
to control mosquito larvae are needed in such wetlands.
In California, surveys have indicated that mosquito larvae
are seldom abundant in vernal pools that have not
been degraded by humans. Vernal pool surveys conducted
by King (Federal Register, 1994) indicated that
mosquitoes bred and developed successfully only in pools
that were degraded. In non-degraded vernal pools, she
only found mosquito larvae late in the season. Wright
(1991) determined that patterns of mosquito occurrence
in vernal pools suggested that absence or rarity of mosquito
larvae was likely due to the characteristic vernal
pool invertebrate fauna with its high abundance of
predatory crustaceans and aquatic insects. Experimental
data have also shown that aquatic predators of fishless
waters, such as notostracans, notonectids and odonate
nymphs, not only reduce survival of mosquito larvae in
pools, but also reduce oviposition by adult females (Fry
et al., 1994; Blaustein et al., 1995; Stav et al., 1999; Stav
et al., 2000). In some experiments mosquitofish presence
has made ponds more suitable for mosquito breeding and
resulted in rapid increases in larval mosquitoes (Hoy
et al., 1972; Hurlbert and Mulla, 1981).
Given the rarity and endemism of many Anostraca
and other crustaceans typical of fishless waters (King
et al., 1996; Petrov and Petrov, 1997; Maier, 1998; Samraoui,
2002), a precautionary approach to their conservation
would be to complete invertebrate surveys of
wetlands (including nearby habitat where dispersal into
fishless wetlands is possible) prior to considering mosquitofish
introductions. Surveys should be conducted
every few weeks while wetlands hold water because
different fairy shrimp species hatch at different times.
Such surveys could reveal both whether mosquitoes are
a problem and whether anostracans are present, leading
to more informed management decisions. To complement
field surveys, we have provided experimental evidence
that presence of mosquitofish in fishless pools may
result in significant reductions in anostracan populations.
The fact that Anostraca rarely occur in waters
with carnivorous fishes (Smith, 2001) indicates that cyst
banks do not provide protection against sustained
mortality of active fairy shrimp due to fish predation.