xabstract
The occurrence of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) in wetland after Spartina alterniflora was first intro- duced into a salt marsh in Shanghai was investigated in this study. Second, a greenhouse experiment was performed to explore the potential effects of S. alterniflora on fungal symbiosis with native Scirpus mariqueter and model plants Lolium perenne L. and Trifolium repens. Field studies showed that the AMF colonization of Phragmite australis grown in mixture communities with P. australis and S. alterniflora was lower than that of single reed communities, suggesting that S. alterniflora inhibited the AMF colonization of reed. In the laboratory, AMF colonization of T. repens and L. perenne L. decreased significantly when S. alterniflora rhizome extracts were added to the plant soils. Moreover, the S. alterniflora communities with less intrusion time showed higher inhibition for AMF colonization. These results have important impli- cations for the restoration of invaded wetlands, suggesting that building and strengthening a mycelium network could contribute to the development of native plant species.

xintroduction
Mycorrhizal fungi can acquire and supply limiting nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, from the soil to a host plant (Burke et al., 2002; Read and Perez-Moreno, 2003), but also enhance resistance to pathogens and other environmental stresses, thereby enhancing plant growth (Parniske, 2008). Arbuscular mycorrhizae fungi (AMF), an important component of salt marsh (Bohrer et al., 2004), have been shown to be in close contact with terrestrial plants and some aquatic plants (Hildebrandt et al., 2001; Bohrer et al., 2004; Stevens et al., 2011). Mycorrhizal symbiosis can enhance the competitive capacity of plants and affect succession dynamics (Pringle et al., 2009). Chemicals produced by invaders can inhibit the growth of surrounding plants in their new habitat. Allelochem- icals from invasive species may be toxic to native plant species and local microbial communities (Cipollini et al., 2012). The effect of allelochemicals on a wide range of belowground biotic interactions
has attracted increasing research attention. Centaurea maculosa can alter both AMF community composition and abundance in the western United States (Bais et al., 2003). Barto et al. (2010) found that extracts from the Eurasian invasive plant Alliaria peti- olata are enriched in some flavonoid glycosides and alliarinoside, which inhibit AMF spore viability.
Spartina alterniflora was first introduced into China as an eco- logical engineering species for protecting embankment, reclaiming beaches, dissipating waves, promoting siltation, improving saline- alkali soil, and reducing eutrophication (Zuo et al., 2012). Various studies have indicated that the total amount of allelochemicals pro- duced by plants is also affected by their cultivar and age (Burgos et al., 1999; Reberg-Horton et al., 2005). The toxicity of allelo- chemicals extracted from woody plants of different ages has been studied (Cleverly et al., 1997; Machrafi et al., 2006). The success of S. alterniflora as an invasive species has been partly attributed to its production of allelopathic compounds, which may limit the growth of native plants in China, such as Phragmites australis and Scirpus mariqueter. Wei et al. (2009) suspected that S. alterniflora might be allelopathic. To verify this conjecture, Wei et al. (2009) used the germinating test plant species with extracts obtained from leaves, stems, and roots of S. alterniflora and reported the presence of
substances with allelopathic potential. However, the character- istics of S. alterniflora, mostly expanding its population size and spatial distribution with asexual reproduction through rhizomes, may change over time.
AMF can help plants in wetlands by promoting their capacity to absorb nutrients, changing their growth and development, and enhancing their salt tolerance. Although exotic species can directly act on target plants, compounds released by a donor plant can indi- rectly affect plants by inhibiting microbes, such as AMF, that benefit surrounding plants. The inhibition of AMF can delay plant growth. S. alterniflora is a non-mycorrhizal-infected plant (Eberl, 2011). Spartina may well have allelopathic effects and inhibit mycorrhiza- aided native plant growth in Chinese salt marshes. We studied the effects of exotic S. alterniflora on native AM fungi in a salt marsh and on test plants in the laboratory by adding S. alterniflora rhi- zome water extracts. A typical salt marsh, the Jiuduansha Wetland in Shanghai, China, was selected as the study wetland. Vegeta- tion and soil samples were collected during 2012 and 2013. Test plants inoculated with commercial AMF were applied in a green- house experiment. Two hypotheses were proposed in this study. First, non-mycorrhizal S. alterniflora is toxic to AMF in the Jiud- uansha Wetland, and S. alterniflora with a shorter invasion time will exert stronger effects on AMF. Second, enhanced AMF will minimize the effect of exotic S. alterniflora on the surrounding plant species. Understanding how S. alterniflora affects native AM fungi will improve management strategies for controlling invasive S. alterniflora. This research was also conducted to examine how organs and age of S. alterniflora affect its allelopathic potential.

xmethods

2.1. Study area and field survey
The study area was located in the Jiuduansha Wetland, which was designated as the National Wetland Nature Reserve in 2005 (Xie and Yang, 1999). The Jiuduansha Wetland mainly consists of three islands, namely, Shangsha Island, Zhongsha Island, and Xiasha Island. It is a typical salt marsh in Shanghai, China, with an east–west length of 46.3 km, north–south width of 25.9 km, and surface area of 423.2 km2 (above the water depth of −6 m). The Jiuduansha Wetland is subject to the East Asia subtropical mon- soon climate, with an average annual temperature of 15.7 ◦ C, mean cumulative annual rainfall of approximately 1200 mm, and average annual temperature range of 17–18 ◦ C. In this study, five sam- pling sites distributed throughout the three islands were designed, where exotic S. alterniflora and native P. australis and S. mariqueter were sampled (Fig. 1).
Site A (SA) was located on Shangsha Island (31◦ 12′ 27′′ N, 121◦ 53′ 52′′ E), which has abundant vegetation that mainly com- prises P. australis. Samples of root and soil were obtained from the single P. australis community site.
Site B (SB1, SB2 and SB3) was located on Zhongsha and Xiasha Islands, where S. alterniflora has invaded and spread. The char- acteristics of S. alterniflora, mostly expanding its population size and spatial distribution with asexual reproduction through rhi- zomes, may change over time. To compare the allelopathic effects of S. alterniflora on different target plants and across different times since the development of invaded and trace S. alterniflora
populations, treatments and analyses of satellite images were con- ducted. By using a cellular automata (CA) model in conjunction with remote sensing and geographical information systems, we simulated the expansion of S. alterniflora for 12 years after being introduced to the Jiuduansha Wetland. Through the CA model, we measured three sample sites where S. alterniflora first invaded and spread in 2000, 2004, and 2007. The three sampling sites com- posed of P. australis and exotic S. alterniflora were SB1 (31◦12′38′′ N, 121◦58′21′′ E), SB2 (31◦11′12′′ N, 121◦58′19′′ E), and SB3 (31◦10′34′′ N, 121◦ 57′ 53′′ E), which represented the mixed communities where S. alterniflora first invaded in 2000, 2004, and 2007, respectively. P. australis and S. alterniflora from the three mixed communities were sampled.
Site C (SC) was adjacent to SB3 with direct impact of tidal waves and periodically flooded soil having a pH of 8.5 (Table 1). Vegetation at SC included S. alterniflora and S. mariqueter. Both plants were sampled from this site (31◦10′12′′ N, 121◦57′40′′ E).
2.2. Plant root and soil sampling
Field sampling was conducted at three-month intervals in the course of four seasons: spring (April 2013), summer (September 2012), fall (November 2012), and winter (January 2013). Accord- ing to the distribution of plant species in each sampling site, we sampled reed in SA, reed and S. alterniflora in SB, and S. mariqueter and S. alterniflora in SC. Entire root systems of six replicate plant individuals of each species and rhizosphere soils were collected at each site. The distance between two sampling points at each site was more than 20 m to ensure that each sample was independent. The collected roots and soils were stored at 4◦C and brought to the laboratory. The roots of individual plants were rinsed in tap water, and the complete root sample was cut into 1cm pieces. Three subsamples (60 root pieces each) were obtained per plant and placed in separate tubes for further processing. Roots were cleared in 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution for 20 min and then stained with trypan blue in lactoglycerol for 30 min. Stained roots were mounted in 50% polyvinyl lactoglycerol on microscope slides, and colonization was estimated using the cross-hair inter- section method, with a minimum target of 50 observations per slide. Spores of AM fungi were extracted from the soil samples by wet sieving and decanting, followed by sucrose centrifugation and recovery of the spores through 50  m sieving of the supernatant. Spores were counted using a stereomicroscope (Walker, 1983). The different morphotypes were identified according to genus level.
2.3. Greenhouse experiment
The relationship between mycorrhizal colonization of roots and rhizome water extract levels was evaluated. The
experiment involved the following treatments: mycorrhizal inoculation (inoculated and non-inoculated) and five levels of rhizome water extracts (0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, and 0.20 g mL−1 ). The treatment was applied to three plant species: Trifolium repens, Lolium perenne L., and S. mariqueter. Twenty plants were grown in each plot, and four parallel samples for each treatment were set. Seeds of L. perenne L. and T. repens were obtained from Beijing Academy of Agricultural Forestry. S. mariqueter seeds sampled from the Jiuduansha Wetland were stored at 4 ◦ C and rehydrated with 1% artificial seawater for four weeks. S. mariqueter was selected as one of the target species because it grows in the same low elevation as S. alterniflora, and it is a native salt marsh plant in the Jiuduansha Wetland. All seeds were surface-sterilized in a 10% NaClO solution for 5 min, washed with distilled water, and placed on moist, sterile sand at 25◦C to induce germination. The seedlings were trans- planted into treatment pots (10cm in diameter, 7cm in height) containing sand sterilized by autoclaving (120 ◦ C, 60 min, two cycles). Well-grown seedlings were paired according to similarity in plant height and randomly assigned to treatments (mycorrhizal (+M) or no mycorrhizal (−M) inoculation). Treatments with myc- orrhizal fungi received 10 g of mixed fungal inoculum (colonized root fragments, hyphae, and spores) of Glomus mosseae BGC XJ01C, Glomus etunicatum BGC XJ03C, and Acaulospora scrobiculata BGC HK02A (Bank of Glomeromycota in China) as a layer halfway down the pot. The surface of the soil in the pots was covered with a 0.5 cm layer of sterilized soil to decrease evaporation and prevent algal growth. S. alterniflora rhizome water extracts with a series of concentrations (0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, and 0.20 g mL−1 ) were added to the pots treated with and without mycorrhizal inoculants (n = 4 per treatment). The concentration of water extracts was set based on the earlier preliminary experiment results. About 200g of tissues were placed in 1L of distilled water, allowed to soak at room temperature for 48h, and stirred for 10min every 12h to make an aqueous 0.2g fresh tissue per milliliter stock solution of S. alterniflora. Solutions were centrifuged at 3000rpm for 4h and vacuum-filtered. The filtrate was diluted to lower treatment concentrations. The plants were watered regularly with deionized water and fed weekly with 2mL of different concentrations of S. alterniflora aqueous extracts. After 14 weeks, all plants were harvested, separated into roots and shoots, dried for 48 h at 60 ◦ C, and weighed to determine total mass. The nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium contents of the plants were measured. Fine roots were prepared and checked for fungal colonization using the “magnified intersections” method described above.
2.4. Statisticalanalysis
Data on chemical and biological soil properties were examined by ANOVA and pairwise t-tests corrected by the Bonferroni adjust- ment method to compare means (P < 0.05). To further understand the variability of the samples, principal component analysis (PCA) of the AM parameters (AM colonization and spore density) was per- formed using the physicochemical parameters as supplementary variables (conductivity, pH, total organic content, salinity, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and some metal element contents). 

xresults
3.1. Mycorrhizal colonization and spore density
Overall, significant differences were observed in the AMF colo- nization of P. australis and the density of AMF spores between SA and SB (Fig. 2). Exotic S. alterniflora reduced the soil spore density by nearly 50% (461 ± 34 [100 g soil dry wt.]−1 , the average of three
P. australis communities mixed with exotic Spartina at SB1, SB2, and SB3, compared with 931 ± 12 [100 g soil dry wt.]−1 at SA with P. australis only; P < 0.001). AM hyphal colonization decreased severely in the invaded soils compared with the uninvaded ones, with values decreasing from 32% to 9% for SA and SB3 (df=1; F value = 22; P < 0.001). Significant differences were also observed in mycorrhizal parameters among the three SB sites; the longer the time since S. alterniflora invaded, the higher the AMF colonization of P. australis and soil spore density. This observation indicated that both S. alterniflora invasion and the time since invasion influ- enced the level of AMF colonization. No significant differences were
recorded in AMF colonization and spore density between different seasons.
Mycorrhizal structures were observed in P. australis and S. mari- queter roots, and Glomus and Acaulospora were the most abundant genera in the S. mariqueter community soils (Fig. 3a–c). These results suggested that mycorrhizae existed in the Jiuduansha Wet- land. S. alterniflora, of which previous studies have shown to be non-mycorrhizal, contained mycorrhizal colonization of less than 10%.
Soils of SC had the highest conductivity (1039  s/cm, Table 1). SA had the highest organic, nitrogen, and metal contents. PCA of the AM parameters (AM colonization and spore density) was
performed using the physicochemical parameters as supplemen- tary variables (conductivity, pH, total organic content, salinity, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and some metal element con- tents). The two first axes of PCA explained 89% of the variability of the sample groups. The projection of the samples sepa- rated (Fig. 4) the samples into three major groups, namely, one group in the SB1, SB2, SB3, and SC sediments colo- nized by exotic S. alterniflora (mostly in the second and third quadrants of PCA), one group of samples with native reed (first and fourth quadrants of PCA), and one group in the area covered by S. mariqueter. This result was consistent with the findings presented in Table 2, clearly suggesting that the significant difference among different sampling sites was due to different vegetation types.
3.2. Allelopathic effect of S. alterniflora on mycorrhizal symbiosis
The root AM colonization (0.71 ± 0.11, 0.77 ± 0.16, and 0.23 ± 0.07 for control L. perenne L., T. repens, and S. mariqueter with- out adding extracts, respectively) and soil spore density (539 ± 24, 401 ± 31, and 254 ± 44 [100 g soil dry wt.]−1 for control L. perenne L., T. repens, and S. mariqueter, respectively) of all test plants were strongly affected by the S. alterniflora water extracts, and the effect increased with increasing concentrations (Fig. 5). The results showed significant differences in the AMF colonization and spore number for L. perenne L. exposed to extracts of different Spartina (SB1, SB2, and SB3) (P < 0.05, Table 3). A high concentration of S. alterniflora water extracts could decrease the mycorrhizal struc- tures in roots (Fig. 3d–f).
3.3. Effect of S. alterniflora water extracts on nutrients in test plants
After 14 weeks of culture in sterilized soil, AM inoculation significantly increased the growth of L. perenne L., T. repens, and S. mariqueter seedlings (Fig. 6). Plants with inoculated AM also exhibited higher nitrogen and phosphorus contents in their tissues than the groups without AM (Table 4). In combina- tion with AMF, test plants grew well and positively affected the average plant biomass (from 65.5 ± 6.4 mg/shoot (without AM) to 75.2 ± 6.0 mg/shoot (with AM) for L. perenne L., from 34.9 ± 3.4 mg/shoot to 49.2 ± 10.6 mg/shoot for T. repens, and from 54.8 ± 7.4 mg/shoot to 63.2 ± 2.8 mg/shoot for S. mariqueter), aver- age nitrogen content (from 21.5 ± 5.0 g kg−1 to 27.3 ± 5.7 g kg−1 for L. perenne L., from 34.9 ± 6.4 g kg−1 to 49.0 ± 9.5 g kg−1 for T. repens, and from 58.2 ± 11.9 g kg−1 to 68.5 ± 11.1 g kg−1 for S. mariqueter), and average phosphorus content (from 363.0 ± 42.1 mg kg−1 to 451.0 ± 55.0 mg kg−1 for L. perenne L., from 242.3 ± 65.3 mg kg−1 to 798.4 ± 51.3 mg kg−1 for T. repens, and from 429.5 ± 21.7 mg kg−1 to 551.6 ± 27.9 mg kg−1 for S. mariqueter; Table 4, Fig. 6). T. repens treated with younger S. alterniflora water extracts from SB1 had an average biomass of 42.12±9.8mg/shoot, whereas that from SB3 had an average biomass of 32.51 ± 8.2 mg/shoot treated with
extracts from SB3, with a highly significant difference between the two groups (Year: F2,73 = 9.658, P < 0.001; Fig. 6). S. alterniflora water extracts negatively affected the biomass of L. perenne L. (from 88.3 ± 6.1 mg [the maximum of both AM+ and AM− treatment] to 64.6 ± 5.3 mg [the minimum of both AM+ and AM− treatment]), T. repens (from 79.6 ± 4.8 mg to 37.8 ± 7.9 mg), and S. mariqueter (from 82.0±6.3mgto49.9±8.9mg).

xdiscussion
The results of the present study showed that the emergence of exotic S. alterniflora extract strongly inhibited mycorrhizal fungi. In the field survey, exotic S. alterniflora negatively affected the AMF colonization of native reed root. Meanwhile, the greenhouse experiment also tested the hypotheses of this study. AMF coloniza- tion of three test plants (L. perenne L., T. repens, and S. mariqueter) decreased while adding S. alterniflora aqueous extracts. Although the inhibitory effects of the extracts on test species varied, high con- centration (0.2 g mL−1 ) inhibited the AMF colonization and seedling growth of all test species completely. The toxicity or the repellent effect of S. alterniflora against test plants enhanced with increas- ing extract concentration, which indicated that inhibition was concentration-dependent. Rudrappa et al. (2007) reported that the most toxic compound against native S. alterniflora is gallic acid, and allelochemicals are active ingredients in exotic P. australis roots in North America. However, S. alterniflora, as a new dom- inant species in Chinese coastal areas, can compete with native plants using novel weapons (Wei et al., 2009). In the present study, S. alterniflora extracts were utilized to estimate their allelopathic strength, and results showed that S. alterniflora with a longer inva- sion history exerted weaker allelopathic effects. S. alterniflora in the community with longer invasion history had a weaker impact on native AM fungi. Without associated specialized enemies in a novel region, invading species might divert resources away from chemical defenses to growth and reproduction, resulting in less allelochemicals after a long time since invasion (Blumenthal and Hufbauer, 2007; Eigenbrode et al., 2008).
The arrival of invasive species can significantly interfere with native soil mycorrhizal fungal communities. Given that some plants are dependent on mycorrhizal symbiosis for growth, the invasive species that do not rely on AMF may secrete allelochemicals to the invaded soil and disturb native AM communities. AM symbiosis in roots significantly increased root area for absorbing nutrients and effectively improved their competitiveness on the soil nutri- ents. Once AM fungi were disturbed by those “novel weapons,” the invaded soil microbial communities including mycorrhizal fungi
changed or ceased to function. Changes in the community struc- ture of mycorrhizal fungi could be conducive to the survival of invasive species, thereby decreasing the competitiveness in absorb- ing nutrients of native plants and facilitating further invasion of exotic plants. The rapid spread of S. alterniflora after its invasion in the Jiuduansha Wetland decreased the local P. australis and S. mariqueter community area and influenced the functions of the local ecosystem by changing sediment settling, the water flow rate, and the cycling processes of carbon and nitrogen in the wetlands (Chen et al., 2009). Previous studies indicated that S. alterniflora lacks AM fungi in its native Atlantic coast and has very low AMF colonization after inoculating AM fungi artificially in greenhouse experiments (McHugh and Dighton, 2004). According to principles in ecology, the success of AM symbiosis depends on the fungi geno- type, plant, and environmental conditions. For example, once the environment is disturbed by the invasion of exotic plant species, such as Solidago canadensis, the changed soil condition certainly has a strong impact on AMF (Jin et al., 2004). Stevens et al. (2011) considered that AM fungi in wetland do not only play an impor- tant role in establishing and maintaining marsh communities, but they also determine the direction of vegetation community succes- sion. Callaway et al. (2008) found that A. petiolata (garlic mustard), one of North America’s most aggressive invaders, inhibits mycor- rhizal fungal mutualism and suppresses plants that rely on AMF by releasing novel biochemicals. In the present study, we attempted to identify factors driving variations in AMF colonization of herba- ceous plants using an experimental approach. S. alterniflora plant extracts were hypothesized to affect AMF colonization by alter- ing the relative costs and benefits of these associations. The results clearly indicated the effects on soil AMF colonization. In addition, plants inoculated with AM fungi can protect themselves and resist suspicious substances from the invasion of exotic species (Barto et al., 2010; Asghari and Cavagnaro, 2011). Exotic S. alterniflora releasing suspicious phytochemicals suggested that it may bene- fit from a form of antifungal model, which hampers the transfer of fixed carbon and other resources between fungi and native plants (Wu et al., 2006). The greenhouse experiment results verified our hypothesis, showing that S. alterniflora communities of different ages may affect the microbial community in varying degrees. AMF colonization and spore density increased with increasing invasion time. Our results were also consistent with the second hypothe- sis in that mycorrhizal inoculation could help plant growth upon adding S. alterniflora extracts. A species can change through time by acclimatization, including morphology and physiology, shifts in gene expression, or resource allocation. For example, Blum et al. (2007) studied the distribution and structure of genetic variation among native S. alterniflora and characterized the evolution mech- anisms of non-native ones. Based on those reasons, the allelopathic
effects of invasive S. alterniflora might change over time. Environ- mental, cultural, and genetic factors are known to affect levels of allelopathic chemicals in plants (Lin et al., 2004). S. alterni- flora communities of different ages might also have different types and quantities of chemicals, with a similar pattern to the results of Alipieva et al. (2003), who found that the concentration of squalene, one of the most toxic allelochemicals, strongly depends on the location of the collection site.
Given the poor understanding of the specific chemicals of S. alterniflora extracts by which soil fungi were inhibited among native plants and because of the limitations inherent in biologi- cal tests, the complex interactions that produced the results of our experiments remain to be investigated. Even though AMF coloniza- tion and spore density decreased in the greenhouse experiments, knowledge about how S. alterniflora altered the composition of the microbial community as a whole remains unclear. Large compo- sitional changes in either fungal species or soil conditions could create environments that are unrealistic in nature. Similarly, plants that grow in the greenhouse may differ from those in natural soils. The two mechanisms may not be mutually exclusive.