xabstract
Ecological and  nancial constraints limit restoration efforts, preventing the achievement of desired ecological outcomes. Harvesting invasive plant biomass for bioenergy has the potential to reduce feedback mechanisms that sustain invasion, while alleviating  nancial limitations. Typha × glauca is a highly productive invasive wetland plant that reduces plant diversity, alters ecological functioning, its impacts increase with time, and is a suitable feedstock for bioenergy. We sought to determine ecological effects of Typha utilization for bioenergy in a Great Lakes coastal wetland by testing plant community responses to harvest-restoration treatments in stands of 2 age classes and assessing community resilience through a seed bank study. Belowground harvesting increased light penetration, diversity, and richness and decreased Typha dominance and biomass in both years post-treatment. Aboveground harvesting increased light and reduced Typha biomass in post-year 1 and in post-year 2, increased diversity and richness and decreased Typha dominance. Seed bank analysis revealed that young stands (<20 years) had greater diversity, richness, seedling density, and  oristic quality than old stands (>30 years). In the  eld, stand-age did not affect diversity or Typha dominance, but old stands had greater Typha biomass and slightly higher richness following harvest. Harvesting Typha achieved at least 2 desirable ecological outcomes: reducing Typha dominance and increasing native plant diversity. Younger stands had greater potential for native recovery, indicated by more diverse seed banks. In similar degraded wetlands, a single harvest of Typha biomass would likely result in signi cant biodiversity and habitat improvements, with the potential to double plant species richness.
Implications for Practice
• Both aboveground and belowground harvest of Typha stands increased plant diversity and richness for 2 years following treatment, indicating that these passive restora- tion methods (without planting) are viable in northern Great Lakes coastal wetlands with relatively intact seed banks.
• Younger Typha stands had a more intact and diverse seed bank than older stands.
• Harvesting Typha biomass for bioenergy production may be an appropriate alternative to herbiciding and burning methods in Great Lakes wetlands.

xintroduction
The extent and intensity of ecological restoration is lim- ited by ecological and  nancial constraints (Miller & Hobbs 2007). A degraded ecosystem reaching an alternate stable state becomes resistant to restoration efforts or requires signi cantly more intense management to overcome ecological thresholds (Suding et al. 2004; Zedler 2009). Dominant invasive wetland plants can drive an ecosystem into an alternate state by causing signi cant changes to soil nutrients and carbon (Tuchman et al. 2009) and depleting native seed banks (Frieswyk & Zedler 2006; Hall & Zedler 2010). These environmental changes may correspond with the length of time that invaders have
been established (Strayer et al. 2006; Mitchell et al. 2011). We predict that plant community responses to restoration efforts will depend in part upon invasive species residence time and that time since establishment can be a useful proxy for an ecosystem’s restorability.
Harvesting invasive plant biomass could reduce feedback mechanisms that sustain the invaded state (Zedler 2009). For example, periodic removal of dense litter and aboveground biomass from invaded wetlands could simultaneously remove nutrient-rich plant tissue, increase light penetration to the soil surface, and increase plant diversity. In addition to the ecolog- ical potential of harvesting, utilization of invasive plant and other biomass residues for energy production could directly offset restoration costs (Quinn et al. 2013), thereby reducing
the  nancial constraints on restoration activities. For instance, Nackley et al. (2013) illustrated that within a 1.1 million hectare fuelshed around a biomass power facility in Washington, the use of invasive shrubs for energy would entirely offset restora- tion, harvesting, and biomass transportation costs. In other regions, highly productive invasive plants have similar poten- tial to serve as biomass fuel stocks (Jakubowski et al. 2010; Quinn et al. 2013).
Cattails (Typha spp.) have long been considered as possible bioenergy crops due to their high productivity, the potential for harvest to remove nutrients from polluted lakes and wetlands, and recently for the generation of carbon credits (Dubbe et al. 1988; Cicek et al. 2006; Grosshans et al. 2012). In eastern North America, Typha × glauca, an invasive hybrid between native Typha latifolia and invasive T. angustifolia (Smith 1987), may be an appropriate species for bioenergy production linked with ecological restoration because of high productivity, undesirable ecological impacts (Tuchman et al. 2009), and the potential for harvesting to restore ecosystem structure and function. Har- vesting of T. × glauca’s congener, T. domingensis, maintains biodiversity in central Mexican wetlands (Hall et al. 2008), and repeated T. × glauca harvesting resulted in increased native graminoid cover in an urban Wisconsin wetland (Hall & Zedler 2010). These  ndings suggest that harvesting has the potential to be a viable restoration method for T. × glauca invaded wetlands.
Typha × glauca in Great Lakes Coastal Wetlands
Great Lakes coastal wetlands provide critical habitat for diverse plants communities (Albert & Minc 2004),  sh (Uzarski et al. 2005), migratory waterfowl, and shorebirds (Prince etal. 1992; Ewert & Hamas 1995) and provide ecosystem services important to human well-being (Sierszen et al. 2012). Northern Lake Huron wetlands remain some of the highest quality, least disturbed coastal wetlands in the U.S. Great Lakes (Uzarski et al. unpublished data). Plant species in these ecosystems tend to sort into three distinct moisture dependent zones (wet meadow, emergent marsh, and submergent marsh). Characteris- tically, the wet-meadow is dominated by sedges (Carex stricta, C. aquatilis, C. lacustris) and blue-joint grass (Calamagrostis canadensis); the emergent marsh by bulrushes (Schoenoplectus acutus, S. pungens), spike rushes (Eleocharis spp.), rushes (Juncus spp.), and cattails (T. latifolia); and the submer- gent marsh by pondweeds (Potamogeton spp.), water-lilies (Nymphaea odorata and Nuphar spp.), and bladderworts (Utric- ularia spp.) (Albert et al. 2005). Presently, these wetlands are undergoing widespread macrophyte invasions (Lishawa et al. 2010; Tulbure & Johnston 2010). Prolonged low water levels in the Great Lakes since 2000 (NOAA 2013) have reduced wave energy and exposed mud  ats along the gently sloping shore- lines (Albert et al. 2013), stimulating the establishment and proliferation of invasive plants (Tulbure et al. 2007). Predicted future water level declines associated with climate change (Angel & Kunkel 2010) will likely exacerbate invasion.
Typha × glauca (hereafter Typha) is invading highly dis- turbed and otherwise intact, diverse, and high-quality Great Lakes coastal wetlands (Lishawa et al. 2010). Once established,
Typha is a superior competitor, spreading rapidly via rhizome expansion (Boers & Zedler 2008), and tolerating variable water levels (Harris & Marshall 1963). Because it is many times more productive than the native plants it replaces, deep organic sediments accrue in Typha stands accompanied by changes in microbial communities, soil nutrients, and biogeochemical cycling (Angeloni et al. 2006; Tuchman et al. 2009; Lishawa et al. 2013; Lishawa et al. 2014). Dead standing culms persist and accumulate as slowly decomposing aboveground litter (Vaccaro etal. 2009), preventing the penetration of light, buffering soil surface temperatures, and resulting in reduced plant diversity (Larkin et al. 2012). The effects of Typha on  oristic and edaphic factors vary temporally. Mitchell et al. (2011) found that litter increased within 10 years, plant diver- sity decreased after 15 years, and soil organic matter (SOM) increased between 10 and 35years following Great Lakes coastal wetland invasion. Similarly, Lishawa et al. (2014) found Typha stand-age negatively correlated with plant diversity and positively correlated with SOM. Furthermore, seed banks in older and highly disturbed Typha stands may be more depleted of native species than younger stands (Frieswyk & Zedler 2006; Hall & Zedler 2010). Thus, we expect that passive restoration (i.e. no additional planting) will promote more diverse plant community recovery in recently invaded wetlands.
We are unaware of any investigations of Typha restoration or seed bank studies in northern Great Lake coastal wetlands that tend to have high  oristic quality (FQI) and low disturbance. In a Typha-invaded northern Great Lake coastal wetland, we asked: (1) How do harvest-restoration methods and time since invasion affect plant community response? and, (2) Do seed banks of more recently invaded stands have a higher capacity for passive restoration than those invaded for longer periods? We experimentally implemented two restoration treatments (above- ground and belowground biomass harvest) in Typha stands of two ages (old >30 years; young <20 years) and evaluated plant community response over 3years (1-year pre-treatment and 2-years post-treatment). Additionally, we conducted an exper- imental seed bank study investigating seedling emergence from  eld-collected sediments exposed to three water levels.
We hypothesized that (H1) both restoration treatments would increase native plant diversity compared to controls, and below- ground harvest would yield the greatest increase in diversity by removing rhizomes which can resprout following aboveground harvesting, (H2) young stands would have greater capacity for native plant community recovery than old stands, as indicated by a more diverse plant response, and likewise, (H3) soil seed banks in younger stands would have higher diversity and density of emergent seedlings than those from older stands.

xmethods
Study Site
We conducted experimental restoration and seed bank studies in Cheboygan Marsh, a Great Lakes lacustrine open-embayment wetland (Albert et al. 2005) on northern Lake Huron near the city of Cheboygan, Michigan (lat 45∘ 39′ N, long 84∘ 28′ W). As
compared to the relatively oligotrophic wetlands characteristic of the region, Cheboygan Marsh has elevated sediment nutrient levels, likely resulting in part from the adjacent City of Cheboy- gan wastewater treatment facility and in part from internal nutri- ent loading (Tuchman et al. 2009; Lishawa et al. 2010). Typha  rst established in Cheboygan marsh in the late 1940s and by 2010 over 62% of the 23 ha wetland was dominated by Typha (Lishawa et al. 2013). Within the invaded portion of the marsh, Typha is highly dominant, making up greater than 99% of above- ground biomass (Angeloni et al. 2006; Tuchman et al. 2009).
Field Experiment
During 2011–2013, we implemented a Typha management experiment testing the effects of stand-age (two levels) and restoration treatment (three levels). Using Typha stand-age maps created by aerial photo interpretation between 1963 and 2010 (Lishawa et al. 2013), we identi ed polygons of similar areas from two age classes (hereafter stands), old (>30 years; 6.37 ha) and young (<20 years; 6.41 ha). We used a 2-stand × 3-treatment factorial design with four replicates, for a total of 24 plots; within each stand, we randomly assigned twelve 16-m2 plots (4 × 4 m) to one of three restoration treat- ments (aboveground harvest, belowground harvest, or control). We established plots in July 2011 and implemented treatments in August 2011. Water levels were below the sediment sur- face in all plots at the time of harvest. Aboveground harvest treatments consisted of cutting all stems at the sediment sur- face using an aquatic weed-wacker (Weeders Digest LLC, New Hope, MN, U.S.A.) and removing biomass and all standing litter from the plot. Belowground harvest consisted of aboveground harvesting followed by hand removal of all rhizomes from the sediment. Hand removal was accomplished by cutting organic sediments into approximately 0.25-m2 blocks, removing rhi- zomes, and returning all non-rhizome material to the plot. To isolate our treatment areas and prevent translocation of nutri- ents and carbohydrates from outside plots, in 2011 and 2012 we severed belowground connections along all plot perimeters by cutting through roots and rhizomes using heavy-duty ice scrap- ers. Within each 16-m2 plot, we established four 1-m2 subplots located 0.5 m from the perimeter at plot corners.
In mid-July of each year (2011, 2012, 2013), we sampled the vegetation in each subplot by assigning aerial cover val- ues (<1 – 100%) for total vegetative cover, detritus, and for each plant species. Additionally, we recorded the presence of all plant species within 16-m2 plots. Total species richness in the plot and the mean cover value of the four subplots were used for analysis. In 2011, we estimated root and rhizome biomass by collect- ing sediment subsamples from the belowground treatment plots (25 cm2 surface area × maximum rooting zone depth), wash- ing sediment, separating roots from rhizomes, and oven drying samples. In 2011, aboveground Typha biomass was estimated for aboveground and belowground plots by subsampling above- ground biomass from 25-cm2 quadrats, oven drying, and weigh- ing the dry biomass. We calculated post-treatment aboveground biomass by collecting 50 culms of varied heights throughout Cheboygan Marsh and creating a stem height-to-dry biomass
allometric equation (g=0.5265e1.751*height(m); r2=0.81). We measured the heights of Typha stems in each subplot in 2012 and 2013 and calculated biomass values using this equation. In late July 2012, we measured light penetration using a LI-189 Quantum sensor (LI-COR Inc., Lincoln, NE, U.S.A.). At each subplot center, we recorded photosynthetically active radiation (PAR, μmols⋅s−1⋅m−2) at 2.0 m, 1.0 m, 0.5 m, and 0.0 m (sedi- ment surface). Mean 2.0-m PAR was considered 100% light for each plot. We estimated light penetration through the canopy for each plot by averaging the four subplot PAR values at each height and relativized them by the mean 2.0-m PAR value.
Seed Bank Experiment
We used the seedling emergence method (van der Valk & Davis 1978) to estimate seed bank composition within the old and young Typha stands. In July 2011, we collected three 5-cm deep sediment plugs with a bulb planter from each 16-m2  eld plot and composited subsamples. Sediment samples were cold strati ed by storing them at 4∘C from July 2011 to June 2012 when the experiment began. We removed detritus, rhizomes, and roots, composited within-stand samples, and thoroughly homogenized the sediments by hand. We spread a 1-cm thick subsample of homogenized sediment over the surface of 10 cm of autoclave sterilized sand in 9.5-cm diameter pots (70.9-cm3 sediment per/pot). We randomly assigned pots to three differ- ent water level treatments (relative to soil surface): high (+5 cm), moist (0 cm), or low (−5 cm). Four replicates of each stand × water level treatment were tested (24 total replicates). In June 2012, experimental pots were randomly placed in an environmental growth chamber under a  uctuating light and temperature regime approximating June conditions in the north- ern Great Lakes region: 16 hours light at 22.5∘C, 8 hours dark at 12.5∘C. Throughout the 6-month study period, water levels were maintained twice a week and every 2 weeks pot locations were re-randomized and seedlings were identi ed and counted. Positively identi ed seedlings were removed from the pots, and unidenti ed seedlings were allowed to grow until identi cation was possible.
Statistical Analysis
Subplots within each plot were averaged and extrapolated to the plot level. We evaluated the effects of stand and year on plant community and environmental variables (Shannon diver- sity [H′], species richness, Typha dominance [% of total veg. cover], aboveground biomass [g/m2 ], belowground biomass [g/m2], and % light reduction) and change in plant community variables between pre- and post-treatment using repeated mea- sures analysis of variance (ANOVA). We assessed differences between treatments within years using Tukey’s honestly signif- icant differences test (HSD). Using indicator species analysis (ISA; Dufrene & Legendre 1997), we evaluated correspondence of individual species with stand (old, young) and treatment (above, below, control) across the 3 years of the study (2011, 2012, 2013). Indicator values of plant species were tested via Monte-Carlo simulation using 1000 permutations. We tested the
effects of year, stand, and treatment on multivariate plant com- munities using permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA; Anderson 2001). We used nonmetric multi- dimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination to characterize plant community differences by stand (old, young) and treatment (aboveground harvest, total harvest, control) and to evaluate associated variables as vectors (McCune & Grace 2002). Dis- similarity between plots was based on Bray–Curtis distances, plots were constructed using two dimensions, and measured variables were tested for signi cance as vectors by permuta- tion procedure (10,000 replicate permutations): species richness (richness), H′, percent unvegetated (unveg), percent vegetated (veg), detritus cover (detritus), Carex spp. cover (Carex), Juncus cover (Juncus), Typha cover (Typha), and water depth (water).
In the seed bank experiment, we tested the effects of Typha stand-age (old, young), experimental water treatments (low, moist, high), and age × water level on seed bank H′, species richness, FQI (Herman et al. 2001), stem density (#/pot), Typha density (#/pot), and Carex spp. density (#/pot) using ANOVA with Tukey’s HSD test.
All statistical analyses were conducted using R 2.12.1 (R Development Core Team 2009) with the labdsv package used for ISA (Roberts 2012) and the vegan package used for NMDS (Oksanen et al. 2006).

xresults
Pre-treatment Plant Communities
In 2011 pre-treatment, 28 plant species occurred across the 24 plots: 7 graminoids, 14 forbs, 1 aquatic, 5 woody species, and Typha (Table S1). There were no statistical differences by stand-age or by random treatment assignment among H′, species richness, Typha dominance (% of total vegetation cover), or aboveground biomass (Table 1; Fig. 1). However, we found signi cantly greater root and rhizome biomass in old Typha stands than in young stands: root-old, (mean±SE; g/m2 ) 4,516 ± 637, root-young, 2,609 ± 724 (p < 0.05); and rhizome-old, 2,678 ± 70, rhizome-young, 1,682 ± 391 (p < 0.05). ISA revealed that a single species, Symphyotrichum puniceum, was indicative of old stands (IV 63.1%; p=0.04; Table S2). Additionally, we found slight but signi cantly greater Cyperaceae species richness in young stands than in old stands (Table 2). NMDS illustrated some clustering of pre-treatment young plot and old plot communities in multivariate space and correlations with several variables: water (r2 = 0.41, p < 0.01); richness (r2 = 0.72; p < 0.01); Carex (r2 = 0.26; p = 0.03); H′ (r2 = 0.64; p < 0.01); and Typha (r2 = 0.29; p = 0.03); (Fig. 2A). However, PERMANOVA revealed no statistical difference between pre-treatment plant communities by age, assigned treatment, or age × treatment (Table 3).
Plant Community Response to Restoration
Species richness nearly doubled from pre-treatment sampling to 53 species in post-year 2. Over the 3-year study, a total of 63 species were identi ed across all 24 plots (Table S1).
In the 2years following treatment, species richness and aboveground Typha biomass varied by Typha stand-age; old stands had both greater richness (old: 12.71±1.21; young: 10.17±1.41 species/m2; p=0.028) and greater Typha biomass (old: 407.5 ± 101.6; young: 309.1 ± 80.2 g/m2 ; p = 0.033) than young stands (Table 1). Neither H′ nor Typha dominance showed a stand-age effect (p=0.80, p=0.21, respectively; Table 1).
Belowground harvest signi cantly altered a suite of plant community measures in post-year 1 and differences persisted in post-year 2 (Tables 1 & 2; Fig. 1). In both years, H′ was greater than either aboveground harvest and control treatments
(both p < 0.05). Species richness more than doubled from pre-treatment (7.00 ± 0.63) to post-year 1 (13.00 ± 1.22) and post-year 2 (14.13 ± 0.90 species/m2 ) and was signi cantly greater than in control plots both years following treatment (both p < 0.05). Typha dominance and aboveground Typha biomass were lower than aboveground and control treatments both years (both p < 0.05). Cyperaceae and Juncaceae species richness were greater (both p < 0.05) in belowground plots than in control or aboveground plots in both years following harvest (Table 2). ISA analysis revealed that in post-year 1, six species were signi cant indicators of belowground harvest treatment, Juncus nodosus (IV 93.4%; p < 0.001), Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani (IV 93.2%; p < 0.001), Ranunculus scel- eratus (IV 92.7%; p < 0.001), J. alpinoarticulatus (IV 84.2%;
p < 0.01), Sparganium eurycarpum (IV 79.1%; p < 0.01), and Alisma triviale (IV 70.7%; p = 0.02). In post-year 2,  ve species were indicative, J. nodosus (IV 85.2%; p < 0.01), S. tabernae- montani (IV 84.9%; p < 0.01), J. alpinoarticulatus (IV 83.8%; p < 0.01), A. triviale (IV 70.7%; p = 0.02), and S. acutus (IV 70.7%; p = 0.02; Table S2).
Compared to controls, aboveground harvest reduced above- ground Typha biomass in post-year 1 (p < 0.05) but did not differ in post-year 2 (Fig. 1D). However, other aboveground harvest treatment effects did not emerge until post-year 2. In post-year 1, aboveground harvest had no signi cant effect on H′, species richness, or Typha dominance, but in post-year 2, each of these factors differed between aboveground harvest and controls (all p < 0.05; Fig. 1). Aboveground harvest increased species richness from 7.25 (±4.53) pre-treatment to 11.5 (±5.95) post-year 1 and 14.00 (±5.83) post-year 2 (Fig. 1B), and richness was signi cantly greater in treatment than in control plots in post-year 2 (p < 0.05; Table 2; Fig. 1B). Native and Cyperaceae species richness were also greater than the control in post-year 2 (p<0.05; Table 2). The native grass Calamagrostis canadensis was a signi cant indicator of above- ground treatment in both post-year 1 (IV: 74.6%; p = 0.02) and post-year 2 (IV: 82.8%; p = 0.01; Table S2).
In both years following treatment, multivariate commu- nity assemblage differed by year, treatment, year×treatment, and stand-age×treatment (PERMANOVA; Table 3). Treat- ment plots clustered in mulitvariate space and were correlated with several variables (Fig. 2B): unveg (r2 = 0.46, p < 0.01); veg (r2 = 0.26, p < 0.01); detritus (r2 = 0.50; p < 0.01); richness (r2 = 0.29; p < 0.01); Carex (r2 = 0.27; p < 0.01); H (r2 = 0.75; p < 0.01); Juncus (r2 = 0.26; p < 0.01); and Typha (r2 = 0.78; p < 0.01).
Light Penetration Response to Restoration
In post-year 1, the percentage of PAR penetration differed significantly by treatment at all three heights above the marsh sediment surface (1.0 ; 0.5; 0.0 m). Light was almost entirely prevented from reaching the sediment surface in the control plots (1.37 ± 0.15% light penetration); whereas belowground harvest dramatically increased light penetra- tion (58.60 ± 3.01%) and aboveground harvest plots had an intermediate effect (29.13 ± 2.20%; Fig. 3). 
Seed Bank Analyses
The high water (+5-cm) treatment prevented any seedlings from emerging in all but two replicates (one old, one young) and was, therefore, eliminated from statistical analyses. Stand-age impacted several important measures of seed bank composition, with young stands exhibiting signi cantly greater H′, seedling density, richness, Carex spp. density, and FQI than old stands (all p < 0.05; Table 4; Fig. 4). Water level treatment impacted Typha seedling emergence; moist (0 cm) had signi cantly greater Typha seedling density (2.75 ± 0.98 seedlings/pot) than the low (−5-cm) treatment (0.13±0.13 seedlings/pot; p=0.03; Table 4; Fig. 4E). Age×water level signi cantly impacted FQI; old-moist treatment had signi cantly lower FQI than any other age×water level treatment (p=0.01; Table 4; Fig. 4F).

xdiscussion
Harvesting invasive plants achieved at least two desired ecolog- ical outcomes in our study (1) reducing Typha coverage, and (2) increasing native plant diversity. As predicted (H1), both above- ground and belowground (i.e. total biomass) harvest treatments increased native plant diversity, reduced Typha dominance and biomass, and increased light penetration in the 2 years follow- ing treatment. Belowground harvest had more immediate and greater impact on all of these measures likely resulting from the elimination of rhizomatous Typha and some release of buried seeds as a result of sediment disturbance. However, despite the robust native plant response, harvesting belowground biomass is not likely feasible at large-scales without specialized machin- ery due to the time intensity of the method (we spent >32 person-hours per 16-m2 plot). Our results indicate that in similar upper Great Lakes coastal wetlands, a single harvest of above- ground Typha biomass alone will result in signi cant biodiver- sity and habitat value improvements, with the potential to more than double native plant species richness.
Typha aboveground biomass is viable for fuel pellet pro- duction (Cicek et al. 2006; Grosshans et al. 2012), and pre- liminary research indicates that it is also a suitable feedstock for biogas digestion (Lishawa et al. unpublished data). Second, we found that pre-treatment aboveground biomass in Cheboy- gan Marsh was greater than reported annual productivity of the bioenergy crop species Panicum virgatum (switchgrass) (Typha: 9.54 ± 0.87 dry mass t/ha this study; P. virgatum: 8 dmt/ha, McKendry 2002). Productivity varied following treatment, how- ever. Harvesting biomass signi cantly reduced aboveground biomass 1 year following harvest, but in the second year fol- lowing harvest, biomass did not differ from the control. Con- trol biomass was also lower post-treatment, however, proba- bly resulting from plot perimeter rhizome cutting. Our results indicate that repeated annual harvesting would likely maintain reduced Typha dominance but would yield diminishing quanti- ties of biomass. Although feedstock viability and productivity values indicate the potential for linking restoration with bioen- ergy production, thorough economic analyses are necessary to assess regional feasibility. Examples of such analyses include evaluation of salt cedar and Russian olive in Washington State (Nackley et al. 2013) and switchgrass, hybrid poplar and wil- low in the northern Great Lakes region (Kells & Swinton 2014). Furthermore, the ecosystem service bene ts of harvesting inva- sive plants, such as potential biodiversity enhancement, green- house gas mitigation, and nutrient removal, should be included in future feasibility studies.
Prior to restoration treatments, old (>30 years) and young (<20 years) Typha stands exhibited nearly indistinguishable aboveground plant community characteristics. These data sup- port Mitchell et al.’s (2011)  ndings that Typha density, lit- ter mass, H′, and species richness all varied with stand-age in a Great Lakes coastal wetland but did not differ signi - cantly beyond 15 years post-invasion. We found that old Typha stands had greater belowground biomass than young stands and following treatment, aboveground Typha biomass re-growth was greater in old stands, likely owing to larger carbohydrate reserves. Despite this aboveground response, and counter to our expectations (H2), native plant communities did not respond more vigorously to experimental harvest in younger stands. The complete removal of the Typha litter layer presumably eliminated differences between age classes as litter accumu- lation is the principal mechanism through which native plants are excluded from Typha-invaded wetlands (Farrer & Goldberg 2009; Vaccaro et al. 2009; Larkin et al. 2012). We expect that over the long-term, faster recovery of aboveground Typha biomass in old stands would be accompanied by more rapid lit- ter accumulation and concomitant depletion of native species diversity, although continued monitoring would be required to con rm this hypothesis. Additionally, it may be possible that the two age classes we identi ed had both surpassed an ecological threshold, beyond which the impact of stand-age is muted. Test- ing our harvest treatments on more recent invasions (<10 years) may have resulted in more diverse community responses.
As predicted (H3), several measures of seed bank community composition were more robust in young stands than in the old stands including H′, richness, seedling density and Carex spp. density. Based on these data, higher diversity and abundance of native species in the experimental young plots in the  eld would be expected, but we did not see this response. This discrepancy may have resulted in part from the vegetative expansion of clonal species, although we did not differentiate between seedling and clonal resprouts. Despite the differences between our  eld harvest treatments and seed bank data, the young Typha stands evaluated in this study clearly had a more intact seed banks than old stands, and therefore greater plant community
resilience (Frieswyk & Zedler 2006). Additionally, we observed widespread  owering and seed production by native plants in our aboveground and belowground study plots, indicating that harvesting may have the potential to replenish the seed bank.
Our results indicate that harvesting Typha biomass is a viable alternative restoration practice to burning and herbiciding. In contrast with Hall and Zedler (2010), who used similar methods in a highly disturbed urban wetland and concluded that restora- tion required annual harvesting for many years with associated planting, we documented increasing ecological returns through 2 years following a single aboveground harvest. Our results indi- cate that there is strong potential for passive (i.e. no planting) restoration of native plant communities in sites with undisturbed hydrology and relatively diverse seed banks, such as within Great Lakes coastal wetlands along the shorelines of northern Lake Huron and the St. Marys River. Wetlands in this region are some of the highest quality in the Great Lakes (Uzarski et al. unpublished data) and are presently experiencing widespread invasion by Typha associated with low Great Lakes water lev- els (Lishawa et al. 2010). Although repeated harvesting would likely be required to maintain diversity over the long-term, man- agement efforts could occur on 3 or more year rotations. We recommend larger scale implementation of above-ground har- vest at or near the sediment surface in these wetland complexes to limit biomass accumulation which reinforces the invaded state. Additionally, there is a need to experimentally examine the effects of aboveground harvest on  sh and bird habitat, ecosystem functions such as greenhouse gas  ux, and the  oral and ecological responses to annual and biennial harvesting in these ecosystems, as repeated harvesting may more accurately re ect bioenergy-focused management. While farm equipment has been used to manage Typha without affecting soil bulk den- sity (Osland et al. 2011), care should be taken to avoid sediment disturbance and compaction, such as using harvesting equip- ment designed for wetland applications.
Management practices involving the utilization of invasive plant biomass for bioenergy may help to offset costs associated with ecological restoration (Miller & Hobbs 2007; Jakubowski et al. 2010; Nackley et al. 2013; Quinn et al. 2013). While conceptually encouraging, it remains unclear under what cir- cumstances harvesting invasive plants will achieve traditional ecological restoration goals like increased biodiversity and ecosystem function. Our  ndings illustrate that in the case of Typha × glauca, there is great potential for linking restoration and bioenergy production.