xabstract
Cascading trophic interactions are important in many freshwater pelagic
 food webs, but their importance in more complex, omnivore-rich littoral-zone food webs
 is less well known. We tested the existence of a trophic cascade involving omnivorous
 crayfish (Orconectes rusticus), macroinvertebrates, periphyton, and macrophytes using 9-M2
 cages in the littoral zone of Plum Lake, Wisconsin, USA. Treatments in the replicated (N
 = 4) experiment were crayfish enclosures, crayfish exclosures, and cageless references.
 During June-September, we measured macrophyte shoot numbers, macroinvertebrate
 numbers, and periphyton (on plastic strips) chlorophyll a, and dry mass (DM). We expected
 that crayfish foraging would directly reduce abundance and change species composition of
 macrophytes and macroinvertebrates and would indirectly enhance periphyton abundance
 by reducing the abundance of grazing snails.
 In enclosures, macrophyte and snail (but not nonsnail macroinvertebrate) densities
 declined significantly throughout the experiment, whereas densities of macrophytes, snails,
 and nonsnail macroinvertebrates increased in exclosures and cageless references. Some of
 the reduction in macrophytes resulted from nonconsumptive fragmentation of macrophytes
 by crayfish. Consistent with the cascading trophic interactions model, periphyton chloro-
 phyll a per unit surface area increased in enclosures, but declined in exclosures. Periphyton
 quality (as indexed by chlorophyll a/DM) also increased in enclosures relative to exclosures
 and cageless references. However, because of large reductions in macrophyte surface area
 (which periphyton colonizes) in enclosures, total amount of periphyton chlorophyll a in
 enclosures (relative to exclosures) probably declined while periphyton quantity per unit
 surface area and periphyton quality increased. Thus, the impacts of crayfish omnivory on
 periphyton, expressed in two conflicting indirect effects, confirm the possibility that om-
 nivory can complicate cascading trophic predictions. Overall, results support the existence
 of strong trophic interactions in the littoral zone, in which omnivorous crayfish control
 abundance of macrophytes, snails, and periphyton

xintroduction
 Biological communities respond to multiple ecolog-
 ical forces, including abiotic factors and food web con-
 figurations (Diamond and Case 1986, Menge and Suth-
 erland 1987, Oksanen and Ericson 1987, Bartell et al.
 1988). For many communities, however, attention by
 ecologists to different factors has shifted over time. For
 example, an older emphasis on the important role
  played by abiotic factors, especially nutrients, in de-
 termining freshwater pelagic community structure and
 productivity (Wetzel 1983) has given way to a synthetic
 view that includes the important role of cascading tro-
 phic interactions (Carpenter et al. 1991).
 A similar, but less conclusive, research trend exists
 for freshwater littoral communities. An ongoing re-
 search tradition emphasizes the importance of abiotic
 factors in determining abundance and species com-
 position of macrophytes (Spence 1982, Wetzel 1983,
 Chambers and Kalif 1985, 1987, Anderson and Kalif
 1986, Chambers 1987a, b), periphyton (Stevenson et
 al. 1985, Cattaneo 1987, Fairchild et al. 1989), and
 invertebrates (Lodge et al. 1987, Rasmussen 1988).
 However, a large proportion of more recent work has
 explored the importance of biotic factors (Sih et al.
 1985, Lodge et al. 1988), especially predation by fishes
 on invertebrates (Hall et al. 1970, Crowder and Cooper
 1982, Morin 1984, Post and Cucin 1984, Bendell and
  McNichol 1987, Mittelbach 1988, Collins 1989, Diehl
 1992), competition among macrophyte species
 (McCreary 1991), and herbivory on periphyton (Lam-
 berti and Moore 1984, Cattaneo and Kalff 1986, Os-
 enberg 1989) and macrophytes (Lodge 1991, Newman
 1991). This recent body of work, including discoveries
 of cascading, indirect effects (Mazumder et al. 1989,
 Weber and Lodge 1990, Br6nmark et al. 1992, Martin
 et al. 1992), suggests that food web configuration, in
 addition to abiotic factors, may be a major force in
 structuring freshwater littoral communities.
 Strong (1992) suggests that trophic cascades exist
 almost exclusively in aquatic communities, and that
 this pattern exists because these communities are spe-
 cies-poor and based on poorly defended plants (algae).
 Strong (1992) argues that top-down forces are unlikely
 to affect producers in more speciose communities.
 However, even if freshwater pelagic food webs are sim-
 ple (cf. Sprules and Bowerman 1988, see Polis 1991
 for a cautionary analysis of an apparently simple food
 web), benthic communities in the same lakes are cer-
 tainly not (Lodge et al. 1988). Benthic communities
 are more like terrestrial than pelagic communities
 (Lodge et al. 1988) with regard to habitat structure,
 spatial heterogeneity, the prominence of vascular plants
 (in addition to algae), and the prevalence of omnivory.
 While the arguments of Strong (1992) have intuitive
 appeal and some empirical support, increasing evi-
 dence suggests that even speciose benthic communities
 may respond strongly to top-down forces (Posey and
 Hines 1991, Brdnmark et al. 1992, Martin et al. 1992,
 Power 1992a). As Power (1992b) points out, even tan-
 gled trophic webs can respond with chain-like dynam-
 ics. In this paper, we test the strength of top-down
 effects, including indirect effects, by an omnivorous
 crayfish, Orconectes rusticus, on a freshwater food web
 complicated by multiple omnivorous links and com-
 petitive interactions.
 Omnivory by 0. rusticus and some aspects of its
 impact on littoral communities have been described
 previously. The diet of 0. rusticus includes macro-
 phytes, invertebrates, and periphyton (Lorman 1975,
 1980), but individuals grow best on a diet of inverte-
 brates or a mixed diet that includes invertebrates (Hill
 et al. 1993). Preliminary experiments suggest that 0.
 rusticus reduces macrophyte abundance (Lodge and
 Lorman 1987, Lodge 1991). In addition, much work
 suggests that among invertebrates, snails are particu-
 larly vulnerable to predation by 0. rusticus (Lodge and
 Lorman 1987, Olsen et al. 1991) and other crayfish
 (Crowl and Covich 1990, Hanson et al. 1990, Alex-
 ander and Covich 1991). This is consistent with the
 model of Lodge et al. (1987) that argues that snail
 assemblages in permanent lakes are likely to be struc-
 tured by predation. In preliminary support of these
 patterns and predictions, a correlative field study in
 Trout Lake, Wisconsin suggested crayfish reduced
 abundance of snails (which often control periphyton
 abundance [Br6nmark 1989]), and indirectly enhanced
 periphyton abundance (Weber and Lodge 1990). Thus,
 the potential for strong top-down direct and indirect
 effects exists, but the extent to which crayfish omnivory
 could dampen the effects of a trophic cascade in a
 complex community is unknown.
 In about the 1960s, Orconectes rusticus, native to
 the lower midwestern U.S., was introduced into north-
 ern Wisconsin, where two ecologically similar, con-
 generic crayfishes (0. vir/is and 0. propinquus) already
 occurred (Capelli and Magnuson 1983, Lodge et al.
 1986, Hill et al. 1993). The impact of 0. rusticus on
 the benthic community may be greater than that of its
 congeners, but all congeners (Seroll and Coler 1975,
 Chambers et al. 1990, Hanson et al. 1990, Olsen et al.
 1991, Hazlett et al. 1992, Hill et al. 1993) and some
 other crayfish genera (Flint and Goldman 1975, Coffey
 and Clayton 1988, Feminella and Resh 1989, Mat-
 thews and Reynolds 1992) probably have strong neg-
 ative effects on macrophytes and macroinvertebrates.
 Our experiment specifically tests the impact of 0. rus-
 ticus, but may more generally suggest the role of cray-
 fishes in benthic communities.
 The littoral-zone food web in which we established
 crayfish enclosures, crayfish exclosures, and cageless
 reference areas is complex (Fig. 1). Possible outcomes
 of changing crayfish abundance are many, depending
 on the relative strength of interactions (sensu Paine
 1980). With our experiment, we are able to compare
 the relative strength of competing direct (omnivorous)
 and indirect links, as explained below. Based on earlier
 work (citations above), our prediction (bold arrows in
 Fig. 1) was that increased crayfish abundance would
 cause a decrease in snails (arrow 1) and an increase in
 periphyton (arrow 2). Both the direct effects of crayfish
 herbivory on macrophytes (arrow 3) and increased
 competition for light (as a result of a thicker periph-
 yton) would reduce macrophytes (arrow 4; Bronmark
 1989, Underwood 1991, Martin et al. 1992). Alter-
 native outcomes are many and include the following.
  If the direct, negative effect of crayfish on periphyton
 (arrow 5, France and Welbourn 1992) exceeds the in-
 direct, positive effect (arrows 1 and 2), periphyton
 abundance would decline with increased crayfish, and
 the indirect effect on macrophytes (arrows 5 and 4)
 would be positive. Macrophytes would also be posi-
 tively affected if the herbivorous interaction between
 snails and macrophytes (arrow 6) is strong, as suggested
 by Sheldon (1987, 1990, cf. Br6nmark 1990) (indirect
 linkage 1, 6 outweighing direct linkage 3). If direct and
 indirect interactions of crayfish with other macroin-
 vertebrates (arrow 7) and periphyton (arrow 8), re-
 spectively, are also strong, they would simply accen-
 tuate the positive response of periphyton produced by
 interactions 1 and 2. If, however, the competitive in-
 teraction between snails and other macroinvertebrate
 algivores (arrow 9; Cuker 1983, Cattaneo and Kalff
 1986) is strong, nonsnail algivores would respond pos-
 itively as crayfish reduce snails, and grazing pressure
 on periphyton might stay constant. Thus, most of the
 interactions indicated on Fig. 1 have been demonstrat-
 ed in experiments, but their relative strength has not
 been tested and is often a contentious issue among
 ecologists (e.g., Sheldon 1987, 1990, cf. Br6nmark
 1 990).
 Our field cage experiment does not have the power
 to discriminate among all possible mechanistic path-
 ways in this highly connected web, because we do not
 examine the mechanisms directly. Our experimental
 design allows us, however, to infer the relative strength
 of conflicting interactions on the basis of the direction
 and strength of responses by different trophic levels.
 For example, if both snails and periphyton declined
 (and other macroinvertebrates did not respond) with
 increasing crayfish, we could conclude that the direct
 link between crayfish and periphyton (arrow 5) is stron-
 ger than the indirect link (arrows 1 and 2). We would
 therefore reject the trophic cascade model for this lit-
 toral zone community.

xmethods
 Study site
 In May-September 1987, we studied the effect of a
 benthic omnivore, Orconectes rusticus (Girard), on the
 abundance of littoral zone macroinvertebrates, mac-
 rophytes, and periphyton. Our study site was located
 along the northwest shore of Plum Lake (Vilas County,
 Wisconsin, Township 41 N Range 8E), a circumneutral,
 mesotrophic, drainage lake (methyl orange alkalinity
 49.5 mg/L, conductivity 90 AS, surface area 380 ha,
 maximum depth 15 m) (Black et al. 1963). At the
 experimental site, the lake bottom was sand with a thin
 organic covering, with abundant submersed macro-
 phytes. Three congeneric crayfishes, Orconectes rusti-
 cus, 0. virilis (Hagen), and 0. propinquus (Girard), oc-
 cur in the lake, but in low abundance at the experimental
 site (< 1 adult crayfish/M2; see Results). The fact that
 crayfish occur in the lake, abundantly at some sites (D.
 M. Lodge et al., unpublished data), indicates that lake-
 wide physicochemical conditions are suitable for cray-
 fish. The duration of our experiment was too short for
 demographic responses or colonization by most prey.
 We therefore chose to conduct the experiment at a site
 where crayfish abundance was low, in the hope that
 even prey species that are particularly vulnerable to
 crayfish would be present initially. Thus, our experi-
 ment mimics responses of the benthic community to
 changes in crayfish abundance that may result from
 declines in predatory fish abundance or from invasions
 by 0. rusticus.
 Design and installation of the experiment
 During June, we installed an in situ cage experiment
 that consisted of four replicates of three treatments:
 crayfish exclosures, crayfish enclosures, and cageless
 reference areas. Each cage and cageless reference area
 encompassed 9 m2 (3 x 3 m) at a water depth of 0.95-
 1.30 m. Each cage was 2 m tall.
 The cageless reference treatment differed from caged
 treatments both in the absence of a cage and the pres-
 ence of fishes (which we excluded from cages). Al-
 though a treatment controlling for cage effects would
 have been desirable, partial cages would have been
 unsatisfactory because any such structure in the littoral
 zone attracts dense concentrations of fish and crayfish.
 Thus, the comparison of greatest interest is between
 enclosures and exclosures because it directly tests the
 effects of crayfish while controlling for any cage arti-
 facts. Because exclosures and cageless reference treat-
 ments had similarly low densities of crayfish (both < 1
 adult crayfish/M2; see Results), a comparison between
 exclosures and cageless references may provide some
 insight into both cage and fish effects, but these two
 factors cannot be rigorously separated. Thus, this com-
 parison is of secondary interest.
 Cages consisted of wooden frames, covered on all
 four sides by aluminum window screening (square mesh
 size = 1 mm). Screening held directly above a LI-COR
 light sensor reduced light by 30%, but the reduction in
 light experienced by plants in the cages would have
 been much less because the tops of the cages were
 uncovered. Every 1-2 wk, we scrubbed the mesh walls
 of the cages to reduce fouling and enhance water move-
 ment. Cage bottoms and tops were left open, but be-
 cause tops protruded at least 0.70 m above the water
 surface, no crayfish escaped. Cage bottoms were buried
 1 5 cm in the sediments and anchored with cinder blocks.
 Metal flashing (sheeting 15 cm wide) on the cage top
 (parallel to the water surface) and bottom (perpendic-
 ular to the sediment surface) of all cages prevented
 crayfish escape or entry. Twice-monthly visual inspec-
 tions confirmed the absence of crayfish burrowing un-
 der the cage bottoms.
 Each experimental block (one enclosure, one exclo-
 sure, one cageless reference, in random placement
  within each block) was 15-20 m from other blocks.
 Within each block, enclosure and enclosure cages were
 2-4 m apart. Cageless references were farther (10-12
 m) from the cages to prevent artifacts in the cageless
 references resulting from predation by fish and crayfish
 attracted to the cages. Cageless references were marked
 with a metal stake at each corner. The entire experi-
 ment spanned z 140 m of shoreline.
 Before establishing the treatments, we used baited
 traps to remove crayfish from each exclosure and en-
 closure. Visual SCUBA surveys in each cage confirmed
 that we had removed all crayfish.
 Crayfish for stocking were collected in nearby Trout
 Lake (Vilas County, Wisconsin Township 41 N, Range
 7E) during 8-15 June and maintained in outdoor tanks.
 On 20 June, we added adult male 0. rusticus to enclo-
 sures at the density of 8 animals/M2 (72 crayfish/cage),
 equivalent to a wet biomass density of 68 g/m2 (as
 estimated from carapace lengths, CL, in millimetres,
 using the following regression for male 0. rusticus: log
 mass = 0.0435CL - 0.3972; N = 25, r = 0.9717, P <
 0.001). Each enclosure received the same size distri-
 bution (<25 mm carapace length [6 crayfish], 25-29
 mm [37], 30-34 mm [22], and 35-55 mm [7]).
 Crayfish densities in enclosure cages (8 individuals/
 m2) accurately simulated predation and grazing pres-
 sures experienced in many northern Wisconsin benthic
 communities. The size range of crayfish we used in-
 cludes some 1-yr-old crayfish (<25 mm), but mostly
 ages 2 and 3 yr (Lorman 1980). In Upper Sugarbush
 Lake, the Vilas County lake for which the most detailed
 information exists, summer densities of 1-3 yr old 0.
 rusticus were 1-56 individuals/, depending on hab-
 itat and month (Lorman 1980). In other lakes, mean
 densities of 0. rusticus and/or congeners (> 20 mm) in
 sandy to rocky habitats are 1-15 individuals2 (Ca-
 pelli 1975, Stein 1977, Lodge et al. 1987, Olsen et al.
 1991). Thus, the density of crayfish in our enclosure
 cages is well within the range of natural densities of
 adult crayfishes.
 The exclusive use of crayfish > 19 mm carapace length
 and the exclusive use of male crayfish may have in-
 troduced countervailing biases into the experiment.
 Large 0. rusticus are more herbivorous than small
 crayfish, but males are more carnivorous than females
 during most of the year (Lorman 1975). (Comparisons
 of feeding by male and female 0. virilis made by Han-
 son et al. [1990] apply only to females carrying eggs
 like those used in their experiments.) While natural
 crayfish populations have a sex ratio near 50:50 (Mo-
 mot 1986), our inability to catch small crayfish and
 female crayfish in early summer (see Lodge et al. 1986)
 dictated our stocking regime.
 Monitoring crayfish densities
 Crayfish densities in enclosures and enclosures were
 monitored throughout the experiment. Once per month,
 a snorkeler counted all visible crayfish in each cage.
 During the first 3 d after introduction, we replaced 13
 dead crayfish in enclosures with crayfish of equal car-
 apace lengths, but did not add any crayfish thereafter.
 Baited traps were kept in the crayfish exclosures for
 the entire summer to ensure that cages in this treatment
 remained free of crayfish. We visually censused adult
 crayfish within the boundaries of each cageless control
 on 8 August.
 Sixteen days before the introduction of 0. rusticus
 and at monthly intervals thereafter, we used SCUBA
 to sample macrophytes, macroinvertebrates, and pe-
 riphyton in all cages and cageless controls as described
 below.
 Macrophyte sampling
 We used a 1-iM2 quadrat (3 x 1/3 m) to census the
 macrophytes present in each cage and cageless refer-
 ence. For each sampling, the quadrat was placed across
 the middle of the cage (in the same position each time);
 we refer to this as the visual census area. Number of
 rosettes (for Vallisneria americana Michx. and Sagit-
 taria sp. [submersed form]) or number of shoots (most
 other species) of each species of macrophyte in the
 quadrat was recorded by a SCUBA diver (nomencla-
 ture after Fassett 1957). For Elodea canadensis Michx.,
 we estimated cover on a scale of 0-5 (where 0 = 0%
 cover, 1 = 20%, ... 5 = 1 00%) because the highly
 branched growth form made it impossible to count
 shoot numbers. Because of the different metric used
 for Elodea, results on Elodea abundance are presented
 separately from that for other species, and analysis of
 relative density of macrophytes excludes Elodea. To
 relate Elodea density to that of other species, we mea-
 sured Elodea cover, Elodea biomass, and total mac-
 rophyte biomass for 10 0.33-iM2 quadrat samples in
 the experimental area on 18 August 1990.
 Once per week, we collected all macrophyte frag-
 ments floating on the water surface within each cage
 using a dip net (mesh size 2 x 2 mm). Samples were
 stored at 5-100C until they were dried at 550C and
 weighed.
 Macroinvertebrate sampling
 To estimate macroinvertebrate populations in each
 cage, we sampled cage walls, sediment, and macro-
 phytes. Macroinvertebrates on cage walls (in exclosures
 and enclosures) were sampled with a 14.2 cm wide
 dustpan, covered (except at the leading edge) with a
 0.5-mm mesh. We placed the dustpan at the bottom
 of a screen in a randomly selected spot on each side of
 the cage (N = 4), pressed it tightly against the wall, and
 moved it steadily upwards to the water's surface. Mac-
 roinvertebrates present within the area sampled were
 caught by the scoop.
 We sampled the sediment to a depth of 5 cm with
 a cylindrical PVC benthic core sampler (height = 29
 cm, inside diameter = 15.22 cm, sample area = 182
 cm2). A metal plate was inserted into a slot at the
  bottom of the corer and the sample, including any
 macrophytes, was transferred to a plastic bag above
 the water. Four cores were obtained from each cage on
 each of four monthly sampling dates. Locations of the
 cores were determined using a stratified random de-
 sign. Each cage was considered to be a 4 x 4 grid
 containing 16 cells of 0.56 m2 area. Because crayfish
 used the cage edges for shelter, sampling was stratified
 to account for any center-to-edge effects. Each month,
 three cores were taken from among the 12 perimeter
 grid cells and one from one of the four central grid
 cells. Each cell was sampled only once during the study.
 Exact location of each core within the grid cell was
 chosen by tossing a small, orange-painted rock.
 To determine the number of macroinvertebrates
 present on macrophytes (exclusive of sediments), we
 also removed randomly selected (using a toss of the
 marker rock) individual macrophyte shoots. Based on
 the visual census data, <20% of the total population
 in each cage of each macrophyte species was removed
 over the entire experiment, with 1-3 shoots/species
 being sampled in each cage on each date. Samples were
 never taken from the 1-iM2 visual census area. Shoots
 were removed by carefully placing a polyethylene bag
 over the shoot and cutting the base of the stem. At the
 surface, we drained excess water out of the bag through
 a 0.5-mm mesh screen.
 Cage-wall, core samples, and macrophyte-removal
 samples were washed through plastic sieves (mesh size
 0.5 mm). All macroinvertebrates retained were pre-
 served in 95% ethanol. Macroinvertebrates were later
 identified and counted at the species level for snails
 (with nomenclature after Burch 1982), order level for
 insects, and class to suborder level for other taxa. Each
 macrophyte shoot in the shoot-removal and core sam-
 ples was identified to species and its leaf number count-
 ed (rosulate species) or shoot length (the sum of the
 length of all branches) measured (other species). All
 floating macrophyte fragments (see Macrophyte sam-
 pling, above) were examined visually for macroinver-
 tebrates; because no snails and very few other macroin-
 vertebrates were ever found, we did not include these
 in our population estimates for macroinvertebrates.
 Because macrophyte densities declined quickly in
 enclosures (see Results), core samples in enclosures
 rarely contained macrophytes, while those in exclo-
 sures often contained macrophytes. To estimate mac-
 roinvertebrate abundances in just the sediments, we
 therefore corrected (reduced) macroinvertebrate totals
 from all core samples based on the macrophyte re-
 moval sampling results for each sampling date, as fol-
 lows. The mean number of macroinvertebrates per
 centimetre of shoot (or number of snails per rosette for
 Vallisneria and Sagittaria) on each species of macro-
 phyte in the macrophyte-removal samples was deter-
 mined. Based on the species, number, and size of the
 macrophytes in each core sample, the appropriate
 number of macroinvertebrates for each species was
 subtracted from the number sampled by the corer. The
 corrected core results therefore allowed us to estimate
 the number of macroinvertebrates on sediments only,
 while the macrophyte removal results allowed us to
 estimate the number of macroinvertebrates on mac-
 rophytes only. For analysis, we thus generated an es-
 timate of number of macroinvertebrates per cage by
 adding numbers of macroinvertebrates on cage walls,
 sediments, and macrophytes.
 To estimate changes in grazing pressure on periph-
 yton, we used Strayer (1985) and Thorp and Covich
 (1991) to classify as algivorous any invertebrate group
 that includes species that are algivorous at any stage
 of their aquatic life.
 Periphyton sampling
 Eighteen days before crayfish were stocked, 12 green
 polyethylene strips (3 cm wide, 65 cm long forestry
 flagging) were placed in each cage and cageless reference
 to allow colonization by periphyton. The lower end of
 each strip was anchored, while the top end was buoyed
 by a small piece of styrofoam. Strips were destructively
 sampled three times for periphyton biomass and chlo-
 rophyll a. In a parallel study, Brbnmark et al. (1992)
 used exactly the same kinds of cages and flagging in an
 experiment with pumpkinseed sunfish and compared
 periphyton biomass on strips to that on natural Pot-
 amogeton robbinsii. Snails and other macroinverte-
 brates colonized strips readily, and periphyton biomass
 on strips was very strongly correlated to biomass on
 natural macrophyte (slope = 1.01, r = 0.85, P < 0.001)
 (Br6nmark et al. 1992), supporting our assumption that
 strips closely mimic macrophytes with respect to pe-
 riphyton biomass.
 For each cage on each sampling date, periphyton was
 scraped with a razor blade from the entire length (both
 sides) of four randomly selected strips. Periphyton from
 each strip was homogenized by rapid shaking in 100
 mL of filtered lake water. One volumetric subsample
 was filtered (Fisher G4 glass fiber, 1.2 Am nominal pore
 retention) for chlorophyll a. Chlorophyll a, corrected
 for pheopigments, was determined fluorometrically af-
 ter extraction of filters (24 h in dark refrigerator) in
 99% methanol (Strickland and Parsons 1968, Holm-
 Hansen and Riemann 1978). A second subsample for
 determination of dry mass (DM, 60'C) was filtered
 onto a preweighed glass fiber filter.
 Statistical analysis
 Because we sampled the same experimental units
 repeatedly over time, the most appropriate analysis
 was a repeated-measures ANOVA (Hand and Taylor
 1987). Within the repeated measures analysis, we used
 the "contrast" option in SAS (SAS Institute 1990) to
 make the comparisons of interest on macrophyte and
 macroinvertebrate responses. The contrast of primary
 interest tested the crayfish effect with a comparison of
 enclosures and exclosures (EN vs. EX) and with the
  interaction of this main effect with time [T (EN vs.
 EX)]. The contrast of secondary interest tested the sta-
 tistically inseparable cage and fish effects with a com-
 parison of exclosures and cageless references (EX vs.
 CR) and with the interaction of this main effect with
 time [T (EX vs. CR)]. Because these two contrasts are
 non-orthogonal, we took the conservative approach of
 making a Bonferroni adjustment of critical alpha for
 two nonindependent comparisons, as suggested by
 Maxwell and Delaney (1990). Thus, we used a critical
 alpha of 0.025 instead of 0.05, whereas the true critical
 alpha lies somewhere between 0.05 and 0.025 (Max-
 well and Delaney 1990). When transformations were
 necessary to normalize residuals, the rankit method
 (Sokal and Rohlf 1981:122-124) was used to choose
 the best transformation. All P values reported are for
 Pillai's Trace, the most conservative of the available
 adjustments for the F statistic in repeated measures
 ANOVA.
 The repeated measures ANOVA routine in SAS
 eliminates any replicate from the analysis that is miss-
 ing a datum for one or more time periods. Because a
 few periphyton samples were lost, we could not apply
 repeated measures ANOVA to the periphyton data.
 Therefore, we used a one-way ANOVA and Tukey's
 test to compare treatments on the last sampling date.

xresults
 Crayfish densities
 Exhaustive trapping at the end of the experiment
 revealed that mortality reduced crayfish in enclosure
 cages to a final density of 4.8-6.1 crayfish/M2 from the
 original 8 individuals/. Observations of dead cray-
 fish and monthly visual counts suggested that mortality
 was relatively constant during the experimental period,
 and was related to molting. Over the summer, only
 four crayfish were caught in exclosure cages (all male
 0. propinquus), to give a mean density of 0.1 adult
 crayfish/M2 (range 0.0-0.2 individuals/M2). In August,
 we counted 0.9 adult crayfish/M2 (range 0.1-2.2 indi-
 viduals/m2) in cageless references. In cageless refer-
 ences, 70% of crayfish sampled were 0. propinquus and
 30% 0. virilis. Although no 0. rusticus were ever sam-
 pled in cageless references, we did see a few at the
 experimental site.
 Because of the low densities of crayfish (< 1 adult/
 mi2) in both exclosures and cageless references, we ex-
 pected responses of snails, macrophytes, and periphy-
 ton in cageless references to be similar to those in ex-
 closures. Any differences between responses in cageless
 references and exclosures would have to be attributed
 to the small differences in crayfish density (possible if
 responses are strongly nonlinear), cage effects, or fish
 effects.
 Macrophytes
 In May, when cages were installed, few macrophyte
 shoots from the previous year (predominantly Pota-
 mogeton robbinsii Oakes) were present. By the first
 macrophyte census on 3 June, most species had begun
 new growth from winter resting stages. In exclosures
 and cageless references, total shoot number increased
 through August and remained at similar levels through
 September, when plants were beginning to senesce (Fig.
 2A). In significant contrast to exclosures, enclosure
 shoot number declined throughout the summer (Fig.
 2A). In September, total shoot density in enclosures
 was 10% that in exclosures. Results for Elodea cover
 were similar to those of all other macrophytes (Fig.
 2B). Exclosures and cageless references did not differ,
 but in enclosures, Elodea was significantly reduced rel-
 ative to exclosures (Fig. 2B).
 Whereas we cannot incorporate Elodea density es-
 timates into total macrophyte density estimates (be-
 cause of the different units used; Fig. 2A, B), the one-
 time mid-August cover and biomass sampling allowed
 us to calibrate the abundance of Elodea relative to
 other species. Mean total macrophyte dry biomass was
 174 g/m2 (range = 108-231 g/m2). The percentage of
 total macrophyte biomass consisting of Elodea was
 well predicted by Elodea cover estimates (% biomass
 = 0.6235[% cover] - 12.78, r2 = 0.8666, P < 0.001).
 This relationship suggests that Elodea was a small com-
 ponent of total biomass in all treatments at all times,
 ranging from < 1 to 8% at the beginning of the exper-
 iment. Peak percentage Elodea biomass (in exclosures
 in July) was 1/5%. Thus, -8 5% of total macrophyte
 biomass is accounted for in the analysis of changes in
 species relative abundance.
 Whereas few macrophyte fragments floated in ex-
 closures, biomass of floating fragments in enclosures
 was high at the first two sampling dates (Fig. 3). Cu-
 mulative floating biomass of all species combined was
 significantly higher in enclosures, but leveled off as
 fewer and fewer plants remained to be clipped by cray-
 fish (Fig. 3). For single-stemmed species, most frag-
 ments were large proportions of shoots, and for rosulate
 species, fragments were large proportions of leaves.
 This suggests that these fragments result from crayfish
 clipping a plant or leaf near the substrate and then
 releasing or losing grasp of it. We clearly underesti-
 mated floating biomass, because some species (Elodea)
 often did not float, and shoots of all species eventually
 sank, often after a shorter interval than our weekly
 sampling.
 Of the 12 macrophyte species occurring in the ex-
 periment, Potamogeton robbinsii, Sagittaria, Vallis-
 neria, and Najasflexilis (Willd.) Rostk.&Schmidt were
 the most common (Fig. 4). Other species were Cera-
 tophyllum demersum L., Chara (a macroalga referred
 to as a "macrophyte" in this paper), Elodea, Megalo-
 donta beckii (Torr.) Greene, Myriophyllum exalbescens
 Fernald, Potamogeton amplifolius Tuckerm., Pota-
 mogeton richardsonii (Benn.) Rydb., and Potamogeton
 zosteriformis Fernald. Visual inspection of plots (not
 shown) of individual species abundance over time in
  the three treatments showed that densities of all mac-
 rophyte species declined in enclosures and increased
 in enclosures and cageless references. Crayfish also re-
 duced macrophyte species richness. In September, we
 sampled 3 species in enclosures, and 12 species in both
 enclosures and cageless references.
 Comparison between enclosures and enclosures in
 macrophyte species composition over time (Fig. 4, Ta-
 ble 1) suggest that any disproportionate effect of cray-
 fish on different species was not strong. Fig. 4 suggests
 crayfish precluded the occurrence of Najas, a late-
 sprouting species that overwinters exclusively as a seed;
 but because of high cage-to-cage variation in Najas
 abundance, ANOVA comparison of enclosures and ex-
 closures (Table 1) provides only marginal support for
 this interpretation (EN vs. EX P = 0.0519). The only
 significant difference between enclosures and cageless
 references was Vallisneria (Table 1), but that difference
 may largely reflect the initially high abundance of Val-
 lisneria in cageless references.
 Macroinvertebrates
 Snails. -Response in total snail abundance was sim-
 ilar to that of macrophyte abundance. Through the
 summer, snail numbers increased in both enclosures
 and cageless references, but decreased in the presence
 of crayfish (Fig. 5). In September, snail density in en-
 closures was 1% that of enclosures. Thus, crayfish sig-
 nificantly reduced snail numbers (EN vs. EX P = 0.024).
 No significant difference existed between exclosures
 and cageless references (Fig. 5).
 Of the 11 snail species that occurred in the experi-
 ment, Amnicola sp., Physella sp., and Helisoma anceps
  (Menke) were most abundant (Fig. 6). Other species
 were Gyraulus parvus (Say), Promenetus exacuous (Say),
 Stagnicola (Lymnaea) emarginata (Say 1821), Cam-
 peloma decisum (Say 1816), Acella haldemani ('De-
 shayes' W.G. Binney 1867), Planorbella campanulata
 (Say 1 82 1), Lym naea stagnalis (Linnaeus), and Valvata
 tricarinata (Say 1817). Visual inspection of plots (not
 shown) of individual species over time in the three
 treatments suggested that densities of all snail species
 declined throughout summer in enclosures and in-
 creased in exclosures and cageless references. Patterns
 of relative species abundance suggest 0. rusticus re-
 duced species richness, especially by eliminating Phy-
 se/la and Helisoma anceps (Fig. 6). In September, three
 species, represented by fewer than six specimens each,
 were sampled in enclosures (Amnicola, Campeloma
 decisum, and Promenetus exacuous). In exclosures and
  cageless references, many more individuals were con-
 tained in samples, coming from six species in exclo-
 sures (Amnicola, Physella, Helisoma anceps, Lymnaea
 stagnalis, Planorbella campanulata, and Stagnicola
 emarginata) and five in cageless references (Amnicola,
 Physella, Helisoma anceps, Planorbella campanulata,
 and Campeloma decisum).
 Species-specific repeated measures ANOVA on rel-
 ative abundance supported the apparent patterns (Ta-
 ble 1). Both Helisoma anceps and Physella differed
 significantly between enclosures and exclosures, where-
 as no significant differences existed between exclosures
 and cageless references (Table 1). Data for Lymnaea
 stagnalis, Acella haldemani, and Valvata tricarinata
 were not analyzed because only one specimen of each
 was sampled during the experiment.
 Nonsnail macroinvertebrates. -Total numbers of
 macroinvertebrates other than snails did not respond
 significantly to 0. rusticus, as indicated by nonsignif-
 icant contrasts between enclosures and exclosures (Fig.
  5). In both enclosures and enclosures, numbers re-
 mained relatively constant through the summer. In
 cageless references, numbers of nonsnail macroinver-
 tebrates increased through the summer, producing a
 marginally significant difference between enclosures and
 cageless references [T (EX vs. CR) P = 0.0248; Fig.
 5].
 Macroinvertebrate community composition.-The
 macroinvertebrate community (including snails and all
 other taxa) was dominated numerically by Diptera lar-
 vae, snails, isopods, amphipods, and Trichoptera lar-
 vae (Fig. 7). Other insects consisted primarily of im-
 mature odonates and Ephemeroptera. Other crustaceans
 consisted primarily of ostracods, cladocerans, and co-
 pepods. Remaining macroinvertebrates consisted pri-
 marily of oligochaetes, leeches, sphaeriid clams, water
 mites, and triclad turbellarians.
 Because 0. rusticus reduced snails but affected other
 macroinvertebrate taxa weakly or not at all, the only
 significant change in macroinvertebrate community
 composition in enclosures relative to enclosures was
 the decline in relative abundance of snails (Fig. 7, Table
 1). Relative numbers of Diptera seemed to increase in
 enclosures as snails declined (Fig. 7), but this inter-
 pretation was only weakly supported by repeated mea-
 sures ANOVA (Table 1, EN vs. EX P = 0.0441). Re-
 peated measures ANOVA also suggested weakly that
 0. rusticus affected Trichoptera numbers (Table 1, EN
 vs. EX P = 0.0397), but given the initially low abun-
 dance of caddisflies in enclosures (Fig. 7), little meaning
 can be attached to this apparent difference. Comparing
 exclosures and cageless reference areas, no significant
 differences in relative abundance of macroinverte-
 brates existed (Table 1).
 Numbers of algivores. -The literature on macroin-
 vertebrate feeding (Strayer 1985, Thorp and Covich
 1991) indicated that all macroinvertebrate taxa other
 than odonates, leeches, clams, mites, and triclads in-
 clude species that are algivorous on periphyton during
 at least part of the aquatic life stage. Accordingly, al-
 givorous taxa comprised 93% of the total numbers of
 nonsnail macroinvertebrates (range = 75-99%, de-
 pending on sampling date). Thus, a plot of all nonsnail
 algivores (not shown) looks exactly like Fig. SB except
 with the vertical axis shifted slightly upward. Thus,
 total nonsnail algivores did not differ between enclo-
 sures and enclosures, and the only difference in grazer
 numbers in enclosures relative to exclosures was the
 reduction in snail numbers. We therefore expected pe-
 riphyton to be higher in enclosures (relative to exclo-
 sures) because of reduced snail numbers in enclosures.
 Because the greatest numbers of grazers (snails plus
 nonsnail grazers) occurred in cageless references (be-
 cause of higher numbers of nonsnail grazers), we ex-
 pected cageless references to have the lowest periph-
 yton abundance.
 Relative impact on snails of predation and macro-
 phyte herbivory. -We expected that crayfish would
 consume snails selectively over macrophytes. Thus, we
 expected the ratio of snails: macrophytes to decline in
  enclosures relative to enclosures and for the ratio in
 cageless references to be similar to that for exclosures.
 We tested this prediction separately for snails and all
 other macroinvertebrates using repeated measures
 ANOVA contrasts on the number of macroinverte-
 brates in a cage divided by the number of macrophytes
 (shoots plus rosettes) in a cage. Natural phenological
 changes in numbers of both macroinvertebrates and
 macrophytes would cause this ratio to change over
 time. Thus, we had no interest in predicting the ab-
 solute value of this ratio or the specific direction or
 magnitude of its temporal trends. Rather, the focus of
 our analysis was how the ratio in enclosures changed
 over time relative to changes in the ratio in exclosures.
 For the ratio of snails: macrophytes, the relative
 trends were consistent with expectations but not strongly
 supported by the statistical analysis (Fig. 8). That is,
  the ratio of snails to macrophytes in enclosures de-
 clined relative to that in enclosures and cageless ref-
 erences, but the enclosure-exclosure contrast was not
 significant. As expected, the trends for exclosures and
 cageless references did not differ significantly (Fig. 8).
 This analysis suggests that 0. rusticus did not strongly
 select snails over macrophytes. However, given that a
 substantial proportion of macrophyte destruction re-
 sulted from nonconsumptive fragmentation (see Fig.
 3), the snail: macrophyte ratio for enclosures (but not
 for exclosures and cageless references) is an inflated
 index of relative consumption of snails and macro-
 phytes, and thus decreases the real difference between
 enclosures and exclosures. Thus, our analysis under-
 estimates the crayfish impact.
 For the ratio of nonsnail macroinvertebrates: mac-
 rophytes, relative trends for enclosures and exclosures
 contradicted our initial expectation that crayfish pre-
 dation would reduce nonsnail invertebrates as well as
 snails (Fig. 8). While the enclosure ratio increased, the
  exciosure ratio declined [T (EN vs. EX) P = 0.020].
 However, as noted above, the enclosure ratio is inflated
 and the difference between the enclosure and exciosure
 ratios is therefore exaggerated. Nevertheless, the pat-
 tern is still consistent with the simultaneous lack of
 effect of 0. rusticus on nonsnail invertebrates (see Fig.
 5) and the strong negative effect on macrophytes (see
 Fig. 2). Despite the destruction of macrophyte habitat,
 the nonsnail invertebrates were apparently unaffected.
 As expected, no significant difference existed between
 exclosures and cageless references (Fig. 8).
 Periphyvton
 Consistent with the predicted top-down effect, pe-
 riphyton areal chlorophyll a increased in enclosures (as
 snails were reduced), while it initially increased slightly
 and later declined in exclosures (Fig. 9A). On the last
  sampling date, enclosure chlorophyll a was three times
 higher than enclosure chlorophyll a (Tukey's P < 0.05).
 However, the pattern of chlorophyll a in cageless ref-
 erences contradicted the expectation (based on total
 grazer abundance) that it would be the lowest of all
 three treatments. Instead, at the conclusion of the ex-
 periment, chlorophyll in cageless references was high
 and did not differ significantly from that in enclosures
 (Fig. 9A).
 As an index of how 0. rusticus affected the com-
 position of the periphyton matrix, we also examined
 the amount of chlorophyll a per unit dry mass of pe-
 riphyton (Fig. 9B). In enclosures, chlorophyll a/DM
 increased throughout the experiment and was 4.5 x
 higher than exclosures at the last sampling date. This
 suggests that the enclosure periphyton matrix was in-
 creasingly dominated by live algae (relative to detritus
 and other components), whereas in the exclosure ma-
 trix, the proportion of live algae declined slightly over-
 all. The chlorophyll a/DM ratio in cageless references
 was similar to that in exclosures throughout the ex-
  periment and did not differ from that in exclosures at
 the last sampling date (Fig. 9B).
 

xdiscussion
 Littoral zone trophic cascade confirmed
 For all responses, the difference between enclosure
 and exclosure cages confirmed the existence of a three-
 level trophic cascade in which 0. rusticus indirectly
 increased periphyton abundance on plastic strips by
 directly reducing the abundance of algivorous snails.
 This pattern occurred because snails are both the prey
 group primarily affected by crayfish, and the function-
 ally most important grazer group among the many
 grazer taxa present in the community. Thus, this food
 web responded as predicted, with chain-like dynamics,
 despite its interconnectedness and the omnivory of
 crayfish (Fig. 1).
 In addition to the direct and indirect effects on snails
 and periphyton, respectively, 0. rusticus directly re-
 duced macrophyte abundance. The occurrence of float-
 ing macrophyte fragments, which is typical of other
 field and laboratory experiments on crayfish grazing
 (Lodge and Lorman 1987, Lodge 1991, Olsen et al.
 199 1), confirm that macrophyte reduction resulted pri-
 marily from direct crayfish foraging and not from any
 indirect links.
 With regard to Fig. 1, overall experiment results
 demonstrated that interactions 1, 2, and 3 were strong,
 as predicted, whereas interactions 5, 6, 7, and 9 were
 weak. The lack of responses by periphyton and mac-
 rophytes to increases in nonsnail macroinvertebrates
 in cageless references further suggests that interactions
 8 and 10 were weak.
 The trophic cascade evoked in our experiment is
 parallel to those described by Brbnmark et al. (1992)
 and Martin et al. (1992) for sunfish, snails, and pe-
 riphyton in two northern Wisconsin lakes and a Ten-
 nessee lake, respectively. Unlike crayfish, however,
 sunfish do not consume appreciable quantities of mac-
 rophytes. Therefore, crayfish have an additional in-
 direct impact on periphyton that sunfish do not-the
 reduction of macrophyte surface area available for pe-
 riphyton colonization. Although algal abundance in the
 presence of crayfish is higher per unit surface area of
 strip (and presumably per unit surface area of mac-
 rophyte and sediment), there is less colonizable surface
 remaining. In terms of total periphyton per unit area
 of lake bottom, then, it remains possible that omnivory
 by crayfish may complicate substantially the chain-like
 dynamics discussed above, which were illustrated by
 periphyton per unit of remaining surface area.
 To estimate the net impact of these counteracting
 forces on periphyton, we calculated the total amount
 of periphyton chlorophyll a in cages (on 9 m2 of sed-
 iment plus macrophyte surfaces), exclusive of the
 scrubbed screen walls. We calculated macrophyte sur-
 face area using August macrophyte shoot number (Fig.
 2) and an estimate of 0.03 m2 surface area per mac-
 rophyte shoot (from Brown and Lodge 1993). Mac-
 rophyte surface area per cage was thereby estimated to
 be 19 and 75 m2 in enclosures and exclosures, respec-
 tively. For both sediments and macrophytes, we mul-
 tiplied by August chlorophyll a densities on strips (Fig.
 9). From this, enclosures and exclosures were estimated
 to have 87 ? 38 mg (mean ? 95% CL) and 113 ? 30
 mg of chlorophyll a per cage, respectively. Although
 confidence limits overlap broadly, these estimates sug-
 gest that in this specific experiment the net effect of
 crayfish was to reduce total resource abundance for
 algivores, while at the same time improving the quality
 of the remaining resource (as indicated by higher chlo-
 rophyll a densities and higher chlorophyll a: dry mass
 ratios; see Fig. 9). The lack of any enclosure-exclosure
 difference in numbers of nonsnail invertebrates (which
 could arise through changes in survivorship) suggests,
 however, that there was no strong net effect of these
 changes on algivores.
 Extrapolations of the net effect of crayfish on total
 periphyton abundance in other lakes or streams would
 depend on crayfish density, density and susceptibility
 of macrophytes to crayfish grazing, periphyton abun-
 dance, and the susceptibility of the algivorous benthos
 to crayfish predation. For communities like that in our
 Plum Lake experiment, where crayfish abundance was
 moderate to high, initial macrophyte density was high,
 and susceptible algivores (snails) were initially abun-
 dant, the net impact on total periphyton abundance is
 likely to be negative. In many other communities (par-
 ticularly where background macrophyte abundance is
 low), the increase in algal biomass per unit of occupied
 area may more than offset losses of macrophyte surface
 area, and net impact of crayfish on periphyton would
 be positive. In our experiment, a three-level trophic
 cascade clearly occurred with respect to periphyton
 abundance per unit of colonized area, but perhaps not
 with respect to total periphyton abundance (i.e., on
 macrophytes and sediments) per area of lake bottom.
 Thus, omnivory by 0. rusticus, feeding on two trophic
 levels, each of which affects periphyton indirectly (Fig.
 1 indirect links 1, 2 and 3, 4), does make generalization
 of net effects more difficult, as suggested by Strong
 (1992).
 Below, we discuss some details of the impact of 0.
 rusticus on macrophytes, macroinvertebrates, and pe-
 riphyton, as revealed by comparison of enclosures and
 exclosures. We then consider what the cageless refer-
 ence treatment may suggest about how experimental
 results may be extrapolated to natural lakes.
 Impact on macrophytes and macroinvertebrates
 Impact on abundance. -In enclosures, crayfish es-
 sentially clear-cut macrophytes, almost eliminated
 snails, and had no impact on nonsnail macroinverte-
 brates. For macrophytes, this supports the observa-
 tions of Lodge and Lorman (1987), who found that
  densities of 0. rusticus as low as 19 g/m2 significantly
 reduced submersed macrophyte biomass. Other stud-
 ies also demonstrate the significant, negative impact
 that several species of crayfish can have on submersed
 macrophytes (Feminella and Resh 1989, Chambers et
 al. 1990, Lodge 1991, Hazlett et al. 1992). The floating
 macrophyte fragments collected from enclosures are
 consistent with results of laboratory experiments, in
 which a large proportion (typically >50%) of macro-
 phyte reduction results from nonconsumptive destruc-
 tion (Lodge 1991, Olsen et al. 1991). This behavior is
 not uncommon among consumers of freshwater mac-
 rophytes (Lodge 1991) and marine macroalgae (e.g.,
 Elner and Vadas 1990).
 The negative impact of crayfish on the population
 of most plant species will be the same whether plant
 tissue is eaten or fragmented. However, population size
 and dispersal of species that readily root adventitious-
 ly, e.g., Elodea, or species that are always rootless, e.g.,
 Ceratophyllum, could, in fact, be enhanced by crayfish
 fragmentation. Cut shoots of most species, however,
 would join the detrital pool, often after being deposited
 by wave action on shore or in shallow water. For mi-
 crobes and detritivores, macrophyte fragments result-
 ing from crayfish feeding could be an important source
 of high-quality detritus during the growing season when
 fresh detritus is ordinarily scarce.
 For snails, the reduction of abundance through direct
 predation by crayfish in our experiment is consistent
 with earlier laboratory and pool experiments with 0.
 rusticus (Lodge and Lorman 1987), 0. propinquus (Ol-
 sen et al. 1991) and 0. virilis (Hanson et al. 1990). In
 contrast to these other experiments, we stocked real-
 istic densities and sizes of crayfish in a natural prey
 assemblage typical of many mesotrophic northern Wis-
 consin lakes. For the direct effects of crayfish on both
 macrophytes and snails, therefore, the current results
 are more robust than earlier ones.
 For nonsnail macroinvertebrates, no other investi-
 gators have tested the impact of 0. rusticus, but the
 lack of impact is roughly consistent with the impact of
 0. virilis on macroinvertebrates in laboratory pools
 (Hanson et al. 1990). 0. virilis strongly reduced snail
 numbers, but had only a weak negative effect on some
 nonsnail macroinvertebrates (Hanson et al. 1990). Most
 nonsnail macroinvertebrates may move quickly enough
 to escape tactile-feeding crayfish (e.g., isopods, am-
 phipods, some Diptera), escape recognition by living
 in cases (e.g., Trichoptera), or avoid contact by living
 in the sediments (e.g., some Diptera). In very shallow
 habitats, some snails crawl out of water on emergent
 tree branches or other vegetation in response to other
 snails being eaten by crayfish (Alexander and Covich
 1991). However, in Plum Lake, as in most lakes, such
 escapes are impossible, and we did not observe any
 snails crawling above the waterline on our cage walls.
 Impact on species richness. - Orconectes rusticus re-
 duced species richness of both macrophytes and snails.
 Mechanisms of species elimination that probably op-
 erated in the experiment include selective feeding by
 crayfish and rarefaction. The results of our experiment
 do not allow us to rigorously distinguish these two
 mechanisms.
 For macrophytes, results of laboratory selection ex-
 periments demonstrate that consumption and frag-
 mentation of macrophytes by 0. rusticus is species-
 selective (Lodge 1991). In our field cage experiment,
 the apparent elimination by crayfish of at least one
 plant species, Najas, may have resulted from selective
 grazing by crayfish, but probably also resulted from the
 inability of Najas to tolerate even small amounts of
 biomass removal. Najas is the only species in the Plum
 Lake macrophyte assemblage that is obligately sexual
 and annual, an unusual reproductive habit among
 aquatic plants. It overwinters as a small seed, whereas
 coexisting Potamogeton species have underground rhi-
 zomes, Vallisneria overwinters as a turion, and most
 other species overwinter in relatively large vegetative
 forms (Hutchinson 1975:233 ff., Bartley and Spence
 1987). Consequently, Najas seedlings have a relatively
 small energy reserve to recover from the removal of
 even a very small amount of biomass by crayfish. Cray-
 fish might therefore have a disproportionate impact on
 Najas, regardless of any preference for Najas.
 Because few snail individuals were sampled in en-
 closures in September, definitive statements about the
 impact of crayfish on species composition are impos-
 sible. Our results are generally consistent with a re-
 duction in species richness of snails that has occurred
 in Trout Lake, Wisconsin as 0. rusticus has invaded
 the lake (Lodge et al. 1986): the only snail species now
 remaining in areas with high abundance of 0. rusticus
 is Campeloma, a species with a very thick shell and
 large adult size (D. M. Lodge and M. W. Kershner,
 unpublished data). Thus, for snails, some of the impact
 by 0. rusticus, as for other crayfish (Alexander and
 Covich 1991), may result from selective feeding by
 crayfish. The most striking result, however, is that all
 snail species were very much reduced.
 In addition, rarefaction probably played an impor-
 tant role in reducing species richness of both plants
 and animals in enclosures. Even if crayfish ate prey as
 encountered, rare species would be eliminated as total
 abundance declined.
 Impact on periphyton
 Our expectation that periphyton biomass would in-
 crease when snails decreased was informed by earlier
 experiments and observations (Lamberti et al. 1987,
 Brdnmark 1989, Osenberg 1989, Weber and Lodge
 1990, Br6nmark et al. 1992, Martin et al. 1992). Snails
 comprised 10-35% of macroinvertebrate numbers in
 exclosures (Fig. 7). Because individual snails were on
 average much larger than individuals of all other mac-
 roinvertebrate taxa (D. M. Lodge and M. W. Kershner,
 unpublished data), snails constituted a much higher
  percentage of total macroinvertebrate biomass and an
 even higher percentage of grazer biomass. Because in
 comparing enclosures and exclosures, snails were the
 only group of macroinvertebrates that responded to
 crayfish, we believe that periphyton increases in en-
 closures were responses to decreases in snail numbers.
 On the other hand, our use of a 500-gm mesh sieve
 means that we did not sample many smaller inverte-
 brate taxa (Strayer 1985), which probably have higher
 mass-specific ingestion rates of algae than larger graz-
 ers. In at least one experiment (Cattaneo and Kalff
 1986), numerical increases in small grazing taxa com-
 pensated for reductions in large grazing taxa. Our re-
 sults showed no evidence of compensatory numerical
 increases of nonsnail macroinvertebrates, but we can-
 not rule out increases in micrograzers that we did not
 sample. Nevertheless, abundant earlier work on similar
 mixed-algivore assemblages (Br6nmark 1989, Osen-
 berg 1989, Brdnmark et al. 1992, Martin et al. 1992)
 support our interpretation that snails were the domi-
 nant grazers on periphyton.
 Orconectes rusticus eats periphyton (Lorman 1975,
 1980, Hill et al. 1993), but our results reported here
 and the Trout Lake patterns of crayfish, snails, and
 periphyton (Weber and Lodge 1990) suggest strongly
 that the positive indirect effect that crayfish have on
 periphyton outweighs the negative direct effect (Fig. 1).
 In addition to increasing the amount of live algae
 (as indexed by chlorophyll a), crayfish altered the qual-
 ity of periphyton, increasing the chlorophyll a: dry mass
 ratio (Fig. 9B). Based on long experience of watching
 crayfish in laboratory and field situations, we believe
 that 0. rusticus directly reduced loosely attached, non-
 algal components of periphyton (e.g., flocculent detritus)
 through nonconsumptive foraging behavior. During
 ordinary locomotion (walking, climbing, tail-flipping,
 etc.), crayfish often disturb the surface over which they
 move. In addition, during night dives, one of us (D.
 M. Lodge) has observed 0. rusticus climbing on mac-
 rophytes, often temporarily collapsing the macrophyte.
 In our cages, one of us (J. E. Aloi) saw crayfish crawling
 on and pulling the plastic strips down to the sediment
 and observed many small tears in the strips that prob-
 ably resulted from bites with crayfish mandibles. Dur-
 ing foraging, 0. rusticus constantly picks at the sub-
 strate with its walking legs. Our results and ancillary
 observations thus suggest that 0. rusticus activity in-
 creases sloughing of loosely attached nonalgal material,
 but does not significantly reduce abundance of living
 algae, which are more firmly attached.
 Cageless references
 In our experiment, the only two responses that dif-
 fered from our expectations occurred in cageless ref-
 erences (relative to exclosures): the marginally signif-
 icant increase in nonsnail invertebrates (Fig. 5) and the
 significant increase in periphyton chlorophyll a (Fig.
 9). Taken together, these two results are doubly puz-
 zling because the first (high invertebrates) should pro-
 duce a response in the second (periphyton chlorophyll
 a) that is exactly the opposite of that observed. Al-
 though the occurrence of both of these two apparently
 anomalous responses in cageless references (relative to
 exclosures) may suggest they result from cage artifacts,
 we do not believe these results are a direct effect of
 cages.
 The most likely effects of cages (in comparison with
 the cageless treatment) would be reduced light and re-
 duced water movement. For invertebrates, we would
 not expect reduced light to have a perceptible direct
 effect. Reduced water movement could reduce impor-
 tation of broadcast insect eggs, but relative abundance
 of insects did not increase in cageless references relative
 to caged treatments (Fig. 7). Thus, we do not think the
 difference in nonsnail invertebrates results from cage
 artifacts.
 For periphyton chlorophyll a, both low light and
 reduced water movement could bias results in the ob-
 served direction, but should also affect macrophytes.
 However, there was no apparent cage artifact for mac-
 rophytes (Fig. 2). Furthermore, periphyton at this depth
 in Plum Lake were nutrient-limited, not light-limited.
 In an experiment designed to test factors limiting pe-
 riphyton growth (and run concurrently with the cray-
 fish experiment reported here), periphyton biomass in
 small, screen-covered, snail-free cages increased 30%
 in response to phosphorus addition (J. E. Aloi, unpub-
 lished data). Finally, in similar field experiments (in-
 volving pumpkinseed sunfish instead of crayfish), using
 cages identical to those in this study in two more pro-
 ductive lakes, no apparent cage effect occurred for pe-
 riphyton (Brdnmark et al. 1992). Thus, for both non-
 snail invertebrates and periphyton chlorophyll a, we
 reject cage artifacts per se as explanations for unex-
 pected results.
 Obvious potential indirect effects of cages were the
 exclusion of fishes, many of which are benthivorous
 fishes that include snails and other invertebrates in
 their diet. Rank abundance (from most to least) of
 littoral fish from electroshocking in Plum Lake in sum-
 mer 1987 was: walleye (Stizostedion vitreum), bluegill
 (Lepomis macrochirus), yellow perch (Perca flaves-
 cens), rock bass (Ambloplites rupestris), smallmouth
 bass (Micropterus dolomieui), pumpkinseed (Lepomis
 gibbosus), and northern pike (Esox lucius) (R. A. Stein
 et al., unpublished data). We observed many fishes,
 especially the specialist molluscivore pumpkinseed and
 the polyphagous molluscivore bluegill in the experi-
 mental area. However, the similarity of trends in snail
 abundance in cageless controls and exclosures, and the
 increase in nonsnail invertebrates in cageless controls
 relative to exclosures suggest that fish did not strongly
 affect overall macroinvertebrate numbers in the cage-
 less controls. However, it is possible that visually feed-
 ing fish predators (in contrast to tactile-feeding cray-
 fish) preferentially removed snails from the relatively
  broad, smooth plastic strips in the cageless references.
 In our experiment, these strips were more exposed rel-
 ative to similar strips in Brdnmark et al. (1992), be-
 cause macrophyte density in cageless references in Plum
 Lake were low relative to those in the two lakes used
 by Brdnmark et al. (1992). Thus, with respect to fish
 predation (but not periphyton colonization [see Ma-
 terials and methods] or crayfish predation), our strips
 may have been a poor mimic of natural macrophytes.
 Unfortunately, we did not census snails or other in-
 vertebrates on the strips.
 Thus, for nonsnail invertebrates and periphyton
 chlorophyll a, results in cageless references remain
 largely unexplained, although we are confident in ruling
 out direct effects of cages. Nevertheless, the primary
 comparisons of interest in our experiment, between
 enclosures and exclosures, reflect the overwhelming
 impact of 0. rusticus on snails, periphyton, and mac-
 rophytes, as discussed under Impact on macrophytes
 and macroinvertebrates.
 Duration of experiment
 If our experiment had included more than one grow-
 ing season, some results might have been different. The
 lack of response of nonsnail invertebrates even after
 macrophytes were almost eliminated by crayfish may
 suggest that macrophytes are not a unique or critical
 habitat for most invertebrates (Brown and Lodge 1993,
 cf. Lodge 1986). These invertebrates apparently simply
 took up residence elsewhere in the cage with no de-
 tectable increase in mortality. However, any sublethal
 effects on these originally epiphytic invertebrates might
 have been expressed in reduced population growth in
 the subsequent growing season.
 Conversely, previous experiments (Cuker 1983, Cat-
 taneo and Kalff 1986) suggest that as snails decline,
 smaller macroinvertebrates show compensatory nu-
 merical increases. For many taxa in our experiment,
 such responses were largely impossible, except through
 changes in survivorship, because the experiment in-
 cluded only one growing season.
 Effects of crayfish on littoral communities
 0. rusticus is the latest invader of three Orconectes
 congeners common in northern Wisconsin lakes (Lodge
 et al. 1986, Olsen et al. 1991). Abundant evidence
 suggests that it may have a more negative impact on
 macrophytes and fisheries than 0. virilis (the only spe-
 cies present in northern Wisconsin in a 1932 survey
 [Creaser 1932]) and 0. propinquus. Recent studies sug-
 gest that may be true for at least three reasons: (1)
 higher growth rate and larger adult size of 0. rusticus
 than 0. propinquus (but not 0. virilis) (Olsen et al.
 1991, Hill et al. 1993); (2) higher mass-specific inges-
 tion rate of snails by 0. rusticus than both congeners
 (Olsen et al. 1991); (3) lower vulnerability to fish pred-
 ators by 0. rusticus than congeners (DiDonato and
 Lodge 1993). Although 0. rusticus may have a quan-
 titatively greater impact on littoral zone communities,
 all three congeners probably have a qualitatively sim-
 ilar impact. For example, 0. virilis reduces macrophyte
 abundance in laboratory pools (Chambers et al. 1990),
 and when the reduction in macrophytes was compared
 to that of 0. rusticus in field cages, it was similar (Haz-
 lett et al. 1992). In addition, 0. virilis reduces abun-
 dance of snails and other invertebrates in laboratory
 pools (Hanson et al. 1990) and apparently competes
 for food with trout in a Utah reservoir (Hepworth and
 Duffield 1987). Thus, crayfish of all three species are
 likely to have important impacts on communities in
 which they occur. Results of this study and a survey
 of 21 northern Wisconsin lakes (D. M. Lodge et al.,
 unpublished data) strongly suggest that lakes with high
 densities of crayfish have reduced abundance and spe-
 cies richness of both macrophytes and snails. Such large
 community impacts probably also have important con-
 sequences for nutrient cycling in lakes (Carpenter and
 Lodge 1986).