xabstract
the invasive tunicate Didemnum vexillum has become widely distributed in estuaries in western North America over the past decade. It has recently invaded eelgrass meadows in a central California estuary, growing directly on shoots and rhizomes. This invasion is of concern due to the important role of eelgrass as a foundation species in coastal communities and the known detrimental effects of this tunicate on sessile organisms in other habitats. The effects of tunicate overgrowth on eelgrass growth and morphology were studied using surveys, field exper- iments, and outdoor mesocosm experiments. In field and mesocosm experiments, there were decreases in eelgrass aboveground growth relative to unfouled shoots. Comparison of D. vexillum growth rates on eelgrass vs. hard substrate in mesocosms showed that growth was higher on hard substrate. The effects of D. vexillum overgrowth on the eelgrass epifaunal community were also characterized; overall invertebrate densities, and specifically tanaid and polychaete densities, were higher on shoots fouled with D. vexillum. Overall, the mean cover of D. vexillum on eelgrass shoots in the field was approximately 15–20% of shoot length. As the eelgrass in the mesocosms had less D. vexillum coverage than in the field, these results are conservative and suggest that relatively low D. vexillum coverage of individual eelgrass shoots may result in modest impacts on eelgrass.

xintroduction
Seagrasses are foundation species that provide coastal habitat and foraging grounds to diverse groups of invertebrates, fish, and birds (Duffy, 2006; Hughes et al., 2009b). In addition to their food value and high primary productivity, seagrasses provide ecosystem functions such as sediment stabilization, juvenile fish nurseries, nutrient cycling, water flow alteration, and carbon sequestration (Heck et al., 2008; Hughes et al., 2009b; Orth et al., 2006; Waycott et al., 2009). They also provide large subsidies to other ecosystems in the form of detritus, nu- trients, plant and animal biomass, and subsidies resulting from second- ary production of algae (Heck et al., 2008). Seagrasses are also in decline worldwide as the result of anthropogenic, climatic, and environmental stressors as well as introduced species, with cascading effects on associ- ated ecosystems (Orth et al., 2006; Waycott et al., 2009). The majority of introduced species in seagrass beds have undetermined effects on seagrasses, but those that have been assessed have predominately negative effects (Williams, 2007).
Among the newest concerns is the recent invasion of eelgrass (Zostera marina) beds by the invasive colonial tunicate Didemnum vexillum. This tunicate, native to the temperate northwestern Pacific Ocean (Stefaniak et al., 2012), is an established invasive species world- wide, including the United States, British Columbia, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, and New Zealand. As a dominant competitor that over- grows hard substrate and other sessile species, it threatens native biodi- versity as well as commercial aquaculture (Carman and Grunden, 2010; Lambert, 2009; Stefaniak et al., 2009; Valentine et al., 2007a). D. vexillum was first found fouling eelgrass in Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, USA in 2008 (Carman and Grunden, 2010). This has also been observed in Drakes Estero and Tomales Bay, California, USA (personal observa- tions). It may alter community composition, e.g. deterring Carcinus maenas predation when it fouls older Mytilus edulis (Auker et al., 2014). It has been found to alter prey composition of fishes on Georges Bank, though its effect may not be negative and it was associated with increased fish trophic diversity (Smith et al., 2014). This tunicate expe- riences little predation, possibly because its acidic tunic deters inverte- brates (for predation documentation see Carman et al., 2009; Forrest et al., 2013; Gittenberger, 2007; Lambert, 2009; Mercer et al., 2009). Other invertebrates do not use it as secondary substrate (Dijkstra and Harris, 2009).
By overgrowing eelgrass, D. vexillum could be a significant threat to eelgrass if it impacts growth and/or survival. Several epiphytic
introduced species have had negative effects on seagrasses, including algae and invertebrates (reviewed in Williams, 2007). Also, algal epi- phyte growth, when unchecked by grazers, has a detrimental effect on seagrass via shading and reducing fluxes of nutrients and gasses (Duffy and Harvilicz, 2001; Hughes et al., 2004; Neckles et al., 1993; Sand-Jensen, 1977; Sand-Jensen et al., 1985). Unlike other tunicate spe- cies that grow on eelgrass leaves, D. vexillum usually grows up from the base of an eelgrass shoot, first covering the sheath and then the leaves. It can “glue” multiple shoots together, and also spreads out along rhi- zomes and stable sediment (personal observations, and see Supplemen- tal Data). Carman and Grunden (2010) hypothesized that D. vexillum overgrowth decreases photosynthesis, seed release, and leaf defoliation, based on observations in Martha's Vineyard, MA. The growth pattern of D. vexillum on eelgrass may prevent the leaves from shedding. At a certain threshold of growth up the eelgrass shoot, D. vexillum may block light and gas fluxes, reducing photosynthesis and redirecting re- sources toward belowground growth (Wong and Vercaemer, 2012). By covering the basal meristem, it may also restrict aboveground growth and production of new leaves.
Additionally, effects of D. vexillum on eelgrass growth, reproduction, and survival could also influence the invertebrate epifauna that use the eelgrass shoots as habitat. A decrease in eelgrass production could indi- rectly impact the invertebrate community via a reduction in resources and habitat. It may also directly impact the invertebrate community by either deterring or attracting invertebrates from using eelgrass shoots for foraging or shelter.
The effects of D. vexillum overgrowth on eelgrass growth rates and morphology were studied, as well as secondary effects on invertebrates closely associated with eelgrass. The hypotheses were that: 1) over- growth by D. vexillum will decrease eelgrass growth rates, leaf area, rhizome length, above:belowground biomass ratio, and other morpho- logical characteristics relative to unaffected eelgrass; 2) D. vexillum will grow more slowly on eelgrass than on hard substrate; and 3) over- growth of eelgrass by D. vexillum will reduce total density of all epifau- nal invertebrates, and epifaunal community composition will differ between shoots with D. vexillum overgrowth compared with unfouled shoots. Hypotheses were tested by measuring eelgrass growth with and without D. vexillum overgrowth in field experiments and laboratory mesocosms and by measuring D. vexillum growth and densities of epi- faunal invertebrates in experimental treatments.

xmethods
2.1. Eelgrass overgrowth in field
Growth of eelgrass with and without D. vexillum overgrowth was measured at a site 12.3 km from the mouth and on the western shore of Tomales Bay, CA (latitude 38° 8′26.10′′N, longitude 122° 53′47.30′′W) (Site W12.3, Fig. 1). Tomales Bay is a narrow, ~20 km long estuary with seasonally limited freshwater inflow (see Hearn and Largier, 1997 for description). Site W12.3 was chosen due to its abundant eelgrass and high levels of D. vexillum overgrowth relative to other regularly sur- veyed sites (Long, 2013). At this site, eelgrass densities at −0.3 m MLLW were ~375 shoots m−2, an average of 0–4.3% of shoots had D. vexillum overgrowth, and D. vexillum grew vertically up eelgrass an average of 5–11 cm (Long, 2013). Colonies grew on eelgrass, cobble, and algae.
Eelgrass growth was measured over nine days in May 2012 and over 11 days in July 2012. All terminal shoots were hole-punched just below the top of the sheath with a syringe two weeks before the end of the experiment (variation on Short and Coles, 2001). Hole-punching in this location more often avoided D. vexillum overgrowth than if the hole-punch was in the lower part of the sheath. New eelgrass growth produced after hole-punching was removed, dried at 60 °C for N24 h, and weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg. For eelgrass growth measurements, the lengths and mass above the reference holes were summed for all leaves in a shoot, including new shoots produced since marking. Hole-punched shoots were at −0.3 m MLLW and collected by cutting below the first rhizome node. The two sampling groups were “With DV,” meaning there was D. vexillum overgrowth, and “Without DV.” Ten shoots in each group were marked in May and July; many shoots were not recovered, which reduced sample sizes. Temperature data (±0.01 °C) was collected with a YSI 6920 V2-2 Series Sonde (YSI Incor- porated, Yellow Springs, OH, USA) 1.3 km northwest of Site W12.3 (Fig. 1) throughout this duration (Cheng et al., 2015).
Eelgrass growth data was calculated on a per day basis so that the May and July results would be comparable. A two-way mixed model analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to test differences in eelgrass aboveground growth rates (cm d−1) between groups, using shoot width at collection as a covariate. A two-way mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA) was similarly used for aboveground biomass pro- duction rates (mg d− 1). Group (“With DV” or “Without DV”) was a fixed factor and time (May and July) and the interaction terms (group ∗ time) were random factors. For the “With DV” group, the mean percent of eelgrass shoot length covered by D. vexillum was calculated as the length of D. vexillum on the aboveground portion of a shoot divided by the total length of the eelgrass shoot from the first node to the end of the longest leaf at collection.
2.2. Eelgrass overgrowth in mesocosms
The effects of D. vexillum overgrowth on eelgrass growth and mor- phology were tested using an outdoor mesocosm experiment at the University of California, Davis Bodega Marine Laboratory (Bodega Bay, CA) in summer 2012 (Fig. 1). Five round 1-m diameter tanks with sand-filtered seawater flowing at ~ 90 l h− 1 were used. Each 300-liter tank had two air stones and one water pump (Powerhead, Taam Rio+ 1700), which created a directed, circular flow around the tank. Light available for eelgrass growth was measured with a LI-193 Underwater Spherical Quantum Sensor (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE) just after eelgrass was added to the tanks. Water temperature was measured con- tinuously in each tank with iButton data loggers (DS1921G, ±0.5 °C, Maxim Integrated, San Jose, CA, USA). Algal epiphytes are a common problem in mesocosm tanks, so sea hares (Phyllaplysia taylori) were added to reduce fouling by epiphytes.
Eelgrass was transplanted from intertidal plants collected in mid- June 2012. Terminal shoots were carefully collected while keeping as many roots intact as possible. A transplant unit consisted of one terminal shoot and one or two lateral shoots. Each terminal shoot was cut to 30 cm and the terminal rhizome to 2.5 cm (Hughes et al., 2009a), and lateral shoots were either left untouched or cut to 30 cm when necessary. Eelgrass was transplanted into 4-liter plastic pots (14 cm diameter), filled with 0.5 cm sieved sand from Bodega Harbor. Before transplanting, measurements were made for terminal shoot width (±0.01 mm), number of rhizome nodes, internode distances for a random subset of transplant units (±0.1 cm), number of leaves, and number of lateral shoots. Each transplant unit was labeled with a numbered cable tie around the rhizome.
Three transplant units were placed in each of 70 pots. Eelgrass was allowed to acclimate for six weeks, and pots were moved to new tanks every 10–11 days. When the experiment began, pots were ran- domly assigned to new tanks approximately every three weeks. Each pot was in four of the five tanks both before and after the experiment began. Pot position was randomized with respect to tank and to the two sides of each tank (splitting each round tank into halves). Changing pot locations was intended to minimize location or tank effects on experimental results. Immediately before the experiment began, there was no significant difference with regard to total number of shoots per pot between treatments (“With DV” and “Without DV”) in a t-test; this suggests that pot environments were comparable before treatment manipulation.
To begin the experiment, D. vexillum colonies were collected in early August and transported in ambient seawater back to the laboratory. The mesocosms were kept in quarantine and outflow was treated to prevent the tunicate from escaping to un-colonized areas. Colony fragments were taken from what appeared to be unique colonies as part of a fouling community in the field. The D. vexillum colonies were fed an appropriate density of concentrated Isochrysis spp. solution (Reed Mariculture) (Fletcher and Forrest, 2011) five days a week by shutting off water inflow for a few hours.
To investigate the effects of D. vexillum growth on eelgrass, each D. vexillum colony was cut to approximately 4 × 1.5 cm and weighed to the nearest 0.1 g wet weight. Each piece had at least one of four sides intact. Half of the pots had been randomly chosen to receive D. vexillum colonies. In these pots, nylon twine was used to loosely tie tunicates to a vegetative terminal shoot growing nearest to the center of the pot. Colonies readily reattach to new substrate, including eelgrass (Bullard et al., 2007; Carman et al., 2014; Morris and Carman, 2012; Rinkevich and Fidler, 2014).
To measure D. vexillum growth on hard substrate, remaining colo- nies were cut to 4 × 1.5 cm, weighed to the nearest 0.1 g, and attached with a rubber band to their own 10 × 10 cm gray, sanded PVC plate. Each plate was hung along the tank side so that it faced out into the tank. The plates hung higher than the pot rims, with two plates in each tank (n = 10 initial, n = 7 final due to death and accidental dislodging).
After D. vexillum was tied to the eelgrass, the experiment ran for 10 weeks until mid-October 2012. Eelgrass growth was measured sim- ilarly to the field experiments, with terminal shoots hole-punched two weeks before the end of the experiment. Shoots were kept intact at the experiment end. For final measurements for pots with D. vexillum, parameters were measured for the shoot on which the colony was originally attached. For the control pots with no D. vexillum, a shoot was randomly chosen to sample for each pot. If that shoot's terminal rhizome was growing out of the pot, the next randomly chosen shoot was measured so that the rhizomes grew in comparable environments. Thirteen pots were excluded from analysis, so that, for example, “With DV” pots were excluded if D. vexillum died before the end of the experiment.
For each sampled shoot, the number of lateral shoots, shoot width (± 0.01 mm), length of all leaves (± 0.2 cm), rhizome length (±0.1 cm), number of rhizome nodes, and length grown for each leaf since hole-punching (± 0.1 cm) was measured. For the “With DV” treat- ment, the length of each D. vexillum colony growing up a terminal shoot from the sediment surface to the top of the colony (±0.1 cm) was mea- sured. For all measured shoots, the rest of the shoot was separated into terminal aboveground, terminal belowground, lateral aboveground, and lateral belowground biomass, dried at 60 °C for at least 48 h, and weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg.
Growth of D. vexillum was measured at the end of the experiment. Wet weight of the colony per pot and per PVC plate was measured to the nearest 0.1 mg, after colonies were scraped off the eelgrass and PVC plates. For the pots, parts of the colony that were growing only on the pot side were excluded, since that was not affecting the eelgrass. For the PVC plates, only the colonies growing on the face of the plate were measured. The colonies were photographed and image analysis (ImageJ, NIH) was used to calculate the total area of D. vexillum per plate and per eelgrass shoot.
ANCOVA (using shoot width at collection as the covariate), two- sample t-tests, and Wilcoxon tests were used to compare eelgrass parameter means between treatments (Table 1). The “With DV” and “Without DV” were compared as fixed treatments. Terminal shoot width was not used as a covariate for metrics that inherently (i.e., biomass) or explicitly (i.e., leaf area) include shoot width.
A linear regression was used to examine whether the length of D. vexillum affected the new biomass or length produced by the terminal shoot, i.e. whether D. vexillum influenced eelgrass growth. Values were only included that were a subset of the “With DV” treatment in which D. vexillum was growing directly on some part of the terminal shoot. For new length produced, an index was created as the dependent vari- able to account for increased growth in wider shoots: new eelgrass leaf length produced (cm) / terminal shoot width (mm). A linear regression was used to investigate why the biomass and length index models yielded different results for the effect of D. vexillum on eelgrass growth in mesocosms. The dependent variable was biomass and the indepen- dent variable was length index.
Changes in D. vexillum colony biomass and area in the mesocosms were calculated as final minus initial measurements. For colonies growing on eelgrass, replicates were excluded in which D. vexillum died or eelgrass rhizomes grew out of the pots. Because the tunicate colonies grew slowly, one-sample t-tests were used to compare the average change in colony biomasses and areas, respectively, against a null hypothesis of zero change. A t-test was used to compare change in area between colonies on eelgrass vs. colonies on PVC plates, since parametric assumptions were satisfied despite the different sample sizes (eelgrass n = 26, PVC n = 7). A Wilcoxon test was used to com- pare change in biomass between treatments.
2.3. Impacts on epifauna
Sampling for epifauna took place at Site W12.3 in Tomales Bay in July 2011 at approximately − 0.3 m MLLW. At 5 m intervals, two shoots that were 1 m apart were collected—one with D. vexillum overgrowth and one without. Single shoots were chosen for sampling rather than the clumps of shoots sometimes contained within one D. vexillum colony. Sampling took place at low tide when shoots where lying horizontally. Ten replicates per group were collected by clipping shoots at the sedi- ment surface and placing each in a plastic bag with seawater for trans- port to the laboratory. This technique may have resulted in larger, mobile epifauna being brushed off by other shoots or swimming away. It may have captured epibenthic taxa as well as eelgrass epifauna.
At the laboratory, samples were initially sieved with a 500 μm sieve. The shoot was then dipped in freshwater to dislodge epifauna and all water was poured through the 500 μm sieve. The procedure was re- peated twice (Carr et al., 2011). Epifauna samples were frozen with no excess liquid and later transferred to 70% ethanol for sorting. Epifauna were sorted and enumerated in the following taxa: nematodes, poly- chaetes, oligochaetes, tanaids, caprellid amphipods, gammarid amphi- pods, isopods, mysids, cumaceans, ostracods, opisthobranchs, limpets, other gastropods, tunicates (including recruits), shrimp, brittle stars, and bivalves. To calculate shoot surface area, D. vexillum was removed before measurement of the length of the eelgrass sheath and leaves (± 0.1 cm) and shoot width (± 0.01 mm).
To compare the mean total invertebrate densities between groups, all species were pooled and the total number of invertebrates on a shoot was divided by the surface area of the corresponding shoot to get invertebrate abundance m−2. The assumption was that D. vexillum added a negligible amount of surface area beyond the eelgrass shoot area. Densities between groups were compared with a t-test.
The five most abundant taxa of invertebrates across treatments were identified, based on the number of individuals across replicates: opistho- branchs, caprellid amphipods, polychaetes, tanaids, and limpets. All other taxa made up b10% of individuals. For tanaids and polychaetes, the most abundant species (24.3% and 14.9% of individuals, respectively), densities were compared between treatments using separate t-tests. Because patterns of density differences between groups were the same as patterns of proportional differences (i.e., the proportion of the invertebrate community a taxon represented), only the analysis of den- sity differences are presented. Individuals from the other three most abundant taxa were grouped together within quadrats and a t-test was performed to compare densities between treatments, since t-tests for the individual taxa showed the same patterns as the group.
2.4. Statistical analyses
Data were analyzed with SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). For two-sample t-tests, normality of residuals was tested using the Shapiro–Wilks test and homogeneity of variances was tested using Levene's test. Data were transformed using log, square-root, and x2 transformations as necessary. If assumptions could not be met using transformation, a Wilcoxon two-sample test was used. For ANCOVA, the above assumptions and homogeneity of slopes were tested. Data used for linear regressions were tested for normality of residuals using the Shapiro–Wilks test. For one sample t-tests, the values were tested for normality using Shapiro–Wilks test and transformed as necessary.

xresults
3.1. Eelgrass overgrowth in field
After normalizing for shoot width, the eelgrass aboveground growth rate (cm d−1) was lower for eelgrass with D. vexillum overgrowth (p = 0.0193) (Fig. 2; Table 2). Aboveground biomass production (mg d−1) was also lower for eelgrass with D. vexillum, with a strong trend toward significance (p = 0.0670) (Fig. 2; Table 2).
In May and July for “With DV” group replicates, on average 18.3% ± 2.1 SE and 22.9% ± 2.7 SE of the length of an eelgrass shoot was covered by D. vexillum, respectively. At Sacramento Landing, the average daily temperature during the experimental periods was 16.3 °C ± 0.17 SE (May 5–14, 2012) and 17.6 °C ± 0.16 SE (July 6–17, 2012).
3.2. Eelgrass overgrowth in mesocosms
On June 30 and July 1, 2012, there was an average of 9.6 h during which light levels were above 100 μmol quanta m−2 s−1 in the mesocosm that received the least light. Average weekly temperatures
for each tank ranged from 12.4 to 16.2 °C, and absolute temperature ex- tremes were 10–24 °C. To compare with field conditions, absolute water temperatures at Sacramento Landing in Tomales Bay can rise to 21.9 °C (Cheng et al., 2015). Intertidal temperatures can rise above this when exposed at low tide (B. Cheng and E.D. Grosholz, unpublished data).
For the “With DV” treatment, the linear relationship between the eelgrass biomass production vs. length of D. vexillum growing on the shoot had a strong trend toward significance (r2 = 0.17, p = 0.0597) (Fig. 3). Data points with zero D. vexillum length mean that it only grew on the rhizome or roots of that shoot (these data are included in the model). There was no significant relationship between the eelgrass length production index vs. length of D. vexillum growing on the shoot (linear regression, r2 = 0.01, p = 0.6497, F = 0.21, df = 1,19). The length production index explained the majority of the variation in the biomass production (linear regression, r2 = 0.56, p b 0.0001, F = 24.50, df = 1, 19). There were no differences between treatments for all other eelgrass parameter comparisons (Table 1).
Although D. vexillum was added to terminal shoots, at the experi- ment end it grew on the terminal shoot, terminal rhizome, roots, lateral shoot, lateral rhizome, or some combination thereof. Eelgrass shoot density increased by 71% from transplanting to the experiment end.
The single D. vexillum colonies in each pot or on each plate often broke up into fragments as they expanded and/or regressed. Colonies increased in mean area on eelgrass (one-sample t-test, p = 0.0400, t = 2.17, n = 26) and PVC plates (one-sample t-test, p = 0.0031, t = 4.76, n = 7), but colonies on PVC plates had higher mean changes in area (Wilcoxon test, p = 0.0001, Z = 3.85). Colonies on eelgrass de- creased in mean biomass (measured as wet weight) (one-sample t-test, p = 0.0348, t = −2.23, n = 26) but had no change in mean biomass on PVC plates (one-sample t-test, p = 0.2630, t = 1.23, n = 7). Thus, colonies on PVC plates had more positive mean changes in biomass than those on eelgrass (t-test, p = 0.0322, t = −2.24, df = 31).
3.3. Impacts on epifauna
Eelgrass with D. vexillum overgrowth had a higher mean inverte- brate density than unfouled eelgrass (t-test, p = 0.0411, t = −2.20, df = 18): using untransformed values, the “With DV” group had 1770.9 invertebrates m− 2 ± 374.9 SE and the “Without DV” group had 1022.4 invertebrates m−2 ± 286.0 SE. Significant differences were found between treatments for polychaetes (Wilcoxon test, p = 0.0079) and tanaids (t-test, p = 0.0215). Both increased in den- sity when D. vexillum was present relative to when it was absent (Fig. 4). The tanaid found was Leptochelia dubia and caprellids in- cluded Caprella californica and Caprella equilibra. There was no signifi- cant difference in densities of the other most abundant species (pooled opisthobranchs, caprellid amphipods, and limpets) between treatments (t-test, p = 0.4646). For “With DV” group replicates, 15.4% ± 3.1 SE of the length of an eelgrass shoot was covered by D. vexillum, on average.

xdiscussion

4.1. Effect of D. vexillum overgrowth on eelgrass
In this study, there was a modest effect of D. vexillum overgrowth on eelgrass growth. Results from the field experiment show a clear nega- tive effect of D. vexillum overgrowth on eelgrass growth when covering up to ~20% of the length of an individual eelgrass shoot. At Site W12.3, the site in Tomales Bay with the most D. vexillum on intertidal eelgrass based on qualitative observations, D. vexillum can grow in large clumps that “glue” together multiple shoots (personal observations). Growth of shoots in these clumps was not measured since marking shoots was difficult.
In the mesocosm experiment in a conservative test, there was a strong trend toward a significant decrease in aboveground biomass pro- duction of eelgrass due to D. vexillum overgrowth (Fig. 3). Eelgrass is ca- pable of altering its morphology and reallocating resources to cope with environmental changes and stress (Backman, 1991; de los Santos et al., 2010; Olesen and Sandjensen, 1993; Peralta et al., 2005, 2006). The cover of D. vexillum in the mesocosm experiment was relatively low compared to field conditions, so this can be viewed as a conservative experiment. Coverage therefore may not have been high enough to produce a significant difference between treatments in eelgrass biomass production on the time scale measured, though there was a strong trend toward a significant linear trend (Fig. 3). The effect of D. vexillum on eelgrass length production index was not significant in the mesocosm experiment, and there is no known explanation for the observed differ- ences in the biomass and length metrics.
These results are consistent with previous studies of invertebrate overgrowth of eelgrass. In San Diego, California, the introduced bryozo- an Zoobotryon verticillatum and anemone Bunodeopsis sp. can weigh down eelgrass leaves and collapse canopies. Bunodeopsis sp. was found to both shade leaves directly and increase self-shading, which led to mortality and decreased eelgrass growth (Sewell, 1996; Williams, 2007). The invasive colonial tunicates Botryllus schlosseri and Botrylloides violaceus grow as epiphytes on eelgrass leaves in the Canadian Maritimes, reducing growth and survival via light attenuation (Wong and Vercaemer, 2012).
The presence of D. vexillum did not have significant effects on biomass or morphology metrics between the mesocosm treatments (“With DV” and “Without DV”) (Table 1). With more D. vexillum over- growth directly on the terminal shoot, rather than on its rhizomes or other parts of the clone, trends in growth rates may become more apparent.
Certain experimental constraints may have affected the results of the mesocosm experiment. The length of this experiment was not ame- nable to studying the long-term effects of D. vexillum overgrowth on eel- grass bed health. Also, the mesocosm experiment conditions did not replicate the D. vexillum growth rates sometimes seen in the field in the dry season, which can be roughly 1 cm2 d− 1 (unpublished data). No colonies formed the clumps sometimes seen in the field. On average in the mesocosm experiment, the colonies on eelgrass increased only slightly in area and decreased in biomass over the course of the experi- ment. Better success with D. vexillum survival and growth in a laborato- ry experiment would give more insight to whether it affects eelgrass at relatively high overgrowth levels. Despite these limitations, the mesocosms replicated natural conditions by receiving adequate light and experiencing water temperatures that were within the range expe- rienced by organisms in the intertidal zone of Tomales Bay (B. Cheng and E.D. Grosholz, unpublished data); increased eelgrass shoot densities at the end of the experiment showed that conditions were favorable for eelgrass. Given the sample sizes in the field experiments and the lack of differences seen between treatments in the mesocosm experiment, it is likely that there are small but significant effects of D. vexillum over- growth on eelgrass at these levels of coverage.
4.2. D. vexillum growth rates on eelgrass
Results from the mesocosm experiment indicated that D. vexillum grew better on hard substrate than on eelgrass, which was likely due to the relative instability of eelgrass shoots. However, the growth envi- ronment for the colonies was not ideal in the pots. Although there was circulation in the mesocosms in general, detritus and algae built up on the sediment surfaces inside the pots. Flow might not have been suffi- cient to remove particles that could clog the zooids or to circulate enough food. The extent to which this problem exists in the field is un- known, although sediment may also clog D. vexillum siphons in eelgrass beds in the field. This may be why D. vexillum does not do well in muddy areas (Valentine et al., 2009).
4.3. Impacts on epifauna
Contrary to the hypothesis that fewer invertebrates will occupy shoots with D. vexillum, mean invertebrate density was higher on these shoots. The higher density was likely due to the significantly higher den- sities of polychaetes and tanaids on shoots with D. vexillum (Fig. 4). The sampling procedure best estimated the effects of D. vexillum on eelgrass use by smaller, less mobile fauna compared to, for example, large iso- pods. If taxa other than tanaids and polychaetes do avoid D. vexillum as predicted, they may simply move to the unfouled part of the shoot when D. vexillum is present. Alternately, the relatively low percent of eelgrass length covered by D. vexillum (~ 15%) may not make a difference to these other species.
Though D. vexillum colonies usually only span a few centimeters around eelgrass shoots at Site W12.3, they may provide refuge from predation for benthic and epibenthic taxa. Polychaetes are often associ- ated with sediments, though one shoot had two polychaetes on the D. vexillum colony at the time of collection (personal observations). The Tomales Bay tanaid L. dubia builds tubes in the sediment (Mendoza, 1982). Therefore, these species might have found refuge di- rectly beneath the D. vexillum colonies at the base of the shoots. Mercer et al. (2009) reported the same or higher benthic species richness and
abundance inside D. vexillum mat areas compared with just outside these areas in Long Island Sound, USA. They also reported a slight com- munity shift toward infauna and deposit feeders inside the mat areas. The authors hypothesized that it may be due to the mat protecting benthic species from epibenthic predators, such as crabs and fish (Mercer et al., 2009). A significant change in species composition in dredge samples from Georges Bank, east of Massachusetts, USA, occurred between time periods before and after D. vexillum became abundant there; two polychaete species contributed the most to the change (Lengyel et al., 2009; Valentine et al., 2007b). Also on Georges Bank, Smith et al. (2014) found three polychaete species positively asso- ciated with D. vexillum. In Puget Sound, Washington, USA, an isopod species and harpacticoid copepod species were positively associated with D. vexillum, though in general the effect of invasive tunicates on the macro- and meiofaunal assemblage was variable (Cordell et al., 2012). Thus, D. vexillum can influence mobile invertebrate community compositions.
5. Conclusion
At the extent of individual shoot overgrowth documented in this study, D. vexillum can decrease aboveground shoot growth. However, despite small sample sizes in the field and modest tunicate growth in the mesocosms, an effect of D. vexillum on eelgrass was still detected. In contrast with this negative finding, D. vexillum may actually have positive effects on certain epifaunal or infaunal taxa.
Because of the negative effects on eelgrass found in this study, D. vexillum likely adds to the cumulative impact of multiple introduced species on seagrass habitats (Williams, 2007). Other invasive fouling species, including the tunicates B. violaceus and B. schlosseri, are found on eelgrass in Tomales Bay as well. These other fouling species on eelgrass, specifically fouling the leaves, may increase shoot and leaf breakage—this could decrease bed productivity by removing necessary carbohydrate storage for winter (Wong and Vercaemer, 2012). Given the multiple stressors that seagrasses encounter, including other invasive species (Orth et al., 2006; Waycott et al., 2009), D. vexillum might contribute significantly to reductions to the health of seagrass ecosystems.