xabstract
Riparian areas have experienced long- term anthropogenic impacts including the effects of plant introductions. In this study, 27 plots were surveyed across three Mediterranean rivers in north- eastern Spain to explore the effects of the invader giant reed (Arundo donax) on riparian habitat features and the diversity, trophic structure, body size, and abun- dances of epigeal and hypogeal arthropods in riparian areas. Using pitfall traps and Berlese funnels, this study detected a significant increase in collembola
abundance and a decrease in the abundance, body size and diversity of macro-arthropods at order and family levels in invaded plots compared to native stands. Invaded and un-invaded areas also differed in the taxonomical structure of arthropod assemblies but not in trophic guild proportions. However, the fact that arthropods were smaller in A. donax soils, together with the absence of particular taxa within each trophic guild or even an entire trophic group (parasitoids), suggests that food-web alterations in invaded areas cannot be discarded. Habitat features also differed between invaded and un-invaded areas with the poorest herbaceous understory and the largest leaf litter deposition and soil carbon stock observed in A. donax plots. The type of vegetation in riparian areas followed by the total native plant species richness were identified as major causal factors to changes in the abundance, diversity and composition of macro- arthropods. However, our analyses also showed that some alterations related to A. donax invasion were inconsistent across rivers, suggesting that A. donax effects may be context dependent. In conclusion, this study highlights an impoverishment of native flora and arthropod fauna in A. donax soils, and suggests major changes in riparian food webs if A. donax displaces native riparian vegetation.

xintroduction
Invasive plants can cause alterations in the composi- tion, structure and functioning of soils that may result in far reaching impacts on ecosystems (Ehrenfeld 2010; Vila` et al. 2011). The decomposition of soil organic matter is carried out by an array of organisms (e.g. microbes, arthropods, nematodes and earth- worms) whose activity regulates the supply of mineral nutrients to plants and consumers in the above trophic levels (Wardle et al. 2004; A’Bear et al. 2013). In addition, some of these organisms such as arthropods and earthworms are a direct food source for many animals, including fish, birds and amphibians (Baxter et al. 2005; Romaniszyn et al. 2007). The impact of invasive plants on decomposers can be explained indirectly by changes in the quantity and timing of resources supply to soil fauna (Ehrenfeld 2003; Molinari and D’Antonio 2014) and/or the alteration of environmental conditions, including the soil hydro- logic balance and physical habitat structure (Ehrenfeld 2010; Vila` et al. 2011). Further, invasive plants can exert a direct negative effect on soil fauna related to differences in tissue chemistry and texture compared to native plants, such as a higher lignin content and/or presence of secondary toxic metabolites (Ehrenfeld 2003; Poulette and Arthur 2011). Thus, studies comparing habitat features and soil fauna between invaded and un-invaded areas shed light on how plant invasions can alter recipient ecosystems.
Terrestrial arthropods play a key role in below and above ground food-webs (Bardgett 2005; David 2014). Arthropods can affect decomposition and nutrient cycling directly by the consumption of organic matter (e.g. millipedes) (Bastow et al. 2008), and indirectly by grazing on microbes (e.g. collem- bola) (A’Bear et al. 2012) or predation upon other invertebrates involved in the organic matter cycle, such as earthworms (e.g. Carabidae) (Symondson et al. 2000). As arthropods cover a wide spectrum of trophic positions due to their high diversity, many studies have examined the relationship between plant diversity and the trophic structure of arthropod assemblies (e.g. Sattler et al. 2010; Haddad et al. 2011; Hedde et al. 2013). Research into plant invasions and arthropods has been, however, mostly focused on the effect of invasive plants on abundance, composition and diversity with evidence of effects in either direction (Sima ̃o et al. 2010; Hengstum et al.
2014). Since there are plant-arthropod specific asso- ciations, these contrasting patterns may reflect such associations, as most research has focused on single arthropod groups, such as spiders (Mgobozi et al. 2008) and insects (Harris et al. 2004). Another source of bias in studies on arthropod diversity and plant invasions may be using different levels of taxonomic resolution across studies, such as order (Yamanaka et al. 2015) and family (Zuefle et al. 2008) levels, and reporting partial diversity measures of soil arthropod diversity; for instance, hypogeal fauna is poorly studied compared to epigeal taxa (e.g. Herrera and Dudley 2003). Thus, research into the effects of plant invasions on arthropod diversity would benefit from studies examining the consistency of diversity patterns across levels of taxonomic resolution and ecosystem compartments.
Originating from southern Asia and some countries of the Mediterranean Basin the giant read (Arundo donax) is considered one of the world’s worst invasive plants (Lowe et al. 2000). This cane-like perennial grass is expanding rapidly along riparian areas in Mediterranean-climate areas after its introduction to stabilise riversides (Di Castri et al. 1990; Aguiar and Ferreira 2013). The consequences of A. donax inva- sion is a matter of concern due to the potential negative effects on many terrestrial animals that rely on native riparian vegetation stands for foraging (amphibians, birds) and nesting (birds) (Naiman et al. 1993; Pennington et al. 2008). A. donax can alter profoundly ecosystem functions by increasing evapo-transpiration rate ten-fold compared to native canopies, favouring forest-fires and/or by modifying the soil structure and native vegetation via the presence of secondary metabolites and increased leaf litter deposition and root biomass (Dudley 2000; Aguiar and Ferreira 2013). A previous study on the effects of A. donax on arthropods has shown a decrease in the abundance and diversity of epigeal and flying arthropods in riparian areas in USA (Herrera and Dudley 2003). In addition, a laboratory experiment reported a reduction in the growth of aquatic arthropods feeding on A. donax leaves associated with their high silica content and the presence of toxic compounds (alkaloids) (Going and Dudley 2008). Body size reduction has major implications for ecosystem functions, as basal metabolism reduces with body size and hence energy transfer between trophic levels (Woodward et al. 2005). However, there is no study examining changes in arthropod body size in areas invaded by A. donax, as well as the associated habitat alterations to changes in soil arthropod diversity.
The present study explores the impact of A. donax on riparian areas by comparing soil arthropod com- munity measures and habitat features between invaded and non-invaded riparian areas in three Mediterranean rivers. If A. donax is a potential threat to the structure and function of riparian ecosystems, invaded and un- invaded areas should show major differences in habitat features and soil arthropods. In particular, since A. donax produces a large leaf litter biomass of poor quality for arthropods, we expect a reduction in arthropod diversity, abundance and body size in invaded soils. However, such effects may not be mirrored in the trophic structure of ground arthropod assemblies due to an apparent high functional redun- dancy of soil food-webs (Seta ̈la ̈ et al. 2005). Thus, if A. donax litter does not negatively affect the detrital food-web, we also expect a positive relationship between leaf litter biomass and soil carbon stock. Finally, we discuss the influence of the river surveyed, the soil compartment examined (epigeal or hypogeal) and taxonomic resolution employed to appraise the effects of A. donax invasion on soil arthropods.

xmethods
Study area and general sampling design
In August 2012, 27 sampling sites were distributed along three 2 km riparian areas across Llobregat (Llobregat River and Vallvidrera stream) and Beso`s (Ripoll River) catchments in north-eastern Spain (Fig. 1). Located close to the cities of Barcelona and Sabadell, our study area is within the Fluvial Parks of Ripoll and Llobregat, and the Natural Park of Collserola. Finding long stretches of a unique vege- tation community was difficult at each river so three sampling sites were located in three vegetation types (n = 3 sites per vegetation type and river). Each sampling site consisted of an A. donax patch (*20 9 3 m) or two of the most frequent native riparian communities found in this area: deciduous tree riparian canopies (Alnion-Incanae and Populion albae; hereafter deciduous forests) and herbaceous communities of moderate wet soils (Silybum-Urticion and Bidention tripartitae; hereafter ruderal plants),
classified according to Font (2014) (see floristic details in Appendix S1). A minimum distance of 50 m was left between sites within each river to ensure the independence of arthropod captures using our sam- pling procedures (see below, Serra and Guerrero 2010). The size of each sampling site (i.e. vegetation patch) was measured in Google EarthÒ and included in the analysis. All 27 sampling sites had similar carbonate hardness (mean ± SD = 18 ± 28dKH) according to previous water quality analyses in this area (Figuerola et al. 2012; Maceda-Veiga et al. 2013). The patchy distribution of native vegetation and A. donax is either because of a recent introduction/plan- tation or due to the restoration practices of resource managers, who often plant native Salix spp. after removal of A. donax. The presence of A. donax in all three rivers dates back to at least 15 years ago but the plots surveyed for the current study correspond to early invasion stages. The native deciduous riparian canopies of Llobregat and Ripoll were planted over 20 years ago, and native and invaded plots in these rivers were surrounded by agricultural and/or urban areas. By contrast, Vallvidrera stream still has patches of native riparian canopy and the riparian areas surveyed in this stream were mostly surrounded by a Mediterranean oak forest (see Appendix S1 for floristic details). A. donax was not observed in or up to 30 m around all the native vegetation patches. As other Mediterranean rivers, floods in the rivers surveyed for the current study usually occur in autumn with a drought period in summer.
Arthropod sampling
Ground arthropods were sampled using pitfall traps and Berlese funnels. The capturability of arthropods in pitfall traps depends on their activity (i.e. ‘abundances of activity’) while the Berlese funnels quantify absolute abundances in a soil sample (Sabu et al. 2011). Pitfall traps consisted of a 500 ml polyethylene container (Ø 10 cm) with a funnel, filled with concentrated sea salt solution as preservation agent as described in Serra and Guerrero (2010). The opening was covered by a sloped stone (15 9 15 cm) that left a space of a few centimetres enabling arthropods to enter but reducing evaporation and protecting the trap content from rain. A trap was located at the centre of each sampling site. Traps were left opened between the 16th and 31st August (15 days) and arthropods were then collected and preserved in 70 % ethanol. The end of the experiment was determined by a summer storm that caused river overflow with the subsequent risk of trap flooding. Nonetheless, previous studies in this region have demonstrated that 15 days are enough to obtain a good picture of arthropod assemblies using pitfalls (Serra and Guerrero 2010).
The Berlese funnels were used to make a quantita- tive assessment of epigeal and hypogeal arthropods at the same sampling sites. For macro-arthropods (e.g. millipedes, woodlice), soil samples were collected using a 36 cm Ø and 15 cm depth metal cylinder; for micro-arthropods (mites Acari and springtails Collem- bola), a small core of 4.3 cm Ø and 15 cm depth was used. All samples were collected in three consecutive mornings (9:00–12:00 h) before the termination of the experiment (31st August), alternating the nine samples collected in the three types of riparian areas surveyed at each river to diminish any effect of time on arthropod
sampling. Samples of large and small cores were then divided into mineral and organic (leaf litter and a thin humus layer) soil layers. These samples were live- extracted for arthropods using the Berlese funnels installed for 15 days and collecting arthropods in tubes with 70 % ethanol under constant light and tempera- ture conditions as described in Enghoff et al. (2009). The few highly mobile species observed, such as harvestmen (Opilionida), were manually collected from substrate samples either in the field or during setting-up the Berlese funnels. A set of collection tubes was left for an extra week under the Berlese funnels but did not collect any arthropods, so we assume that the extraction time did not affect arthropod captures.
Soil and vegetation characteristics
At each sampling site (n = 27) we measured the percentage of litter deposition in relation to the volume of the metal cylinder used for sampling macro-arthropods (see above). Removing the herba- ceous understory to determine plant biomass was not allowed because it would have seriously affected riparian areas. Therefore, a proxy of plant biomass was used by recording four measures of herb height in five 1 9 1 m plots evenly distributed along the major axis of each sampling site and sampled across patch. The percentage of soil covered by herbs and the native plant richness in each sampling site were determined following the same procedure. Since plant richness is a major driver of arthropod diversity (Haddad et al. 2009), we also recorded native plant species richness in nearby adjacent habitats. This enabled us to explore if neighbouring areas with a diverse native flora can reduce the effects of A. donax stands on arthropods. Adjacent plant communities were located at less than 2 m from the centre of each target plot and their effects generally occur at distances below 50 m (Gonza ́lez- Moreno et al. 2013). A sample of soil (*100 cm3) was also collected below the leaf layer in each sampling site to determine possible effects of A. donax on soil pH, organic carbon stock and water content. These soil samples were individually packed in plastic bags in the field, transported in porexpan boxes to the laboratory and analysed upon arrival. Samples were sieved through a 2-mm mesh and kept at 60 °C until a constant weight was attained, usually after approxi- mately 72 h. Water content was determined by weighing the samples before and after being dried in the oven. Dried-soil (10 g) and 25 ml of deionised water were shaken together for 15 min and left to settle for 30 min twice before pH was determined with a pH probe as described by Luo et al. (2011). Soil organic carbon stock was determined by the loss-on- ignition method as described by Sutherland (1998).
Data analysis
The arthropod captures at each sampling site were evaluated using abundances, alpha diversity indicators and community structure measures. Two indicators of alpha diversity were considered: taxa richness and the Shannon index. The Shannon index is a widely-used indicator of taxa diversity in a community and was determined using the log-base (Moreno 2001). Since, owing to the high diversity of ground arthropods, all census are likely to be incomplete, three richness estimators (Chao, Jackknife 1 and 2 methods) were
computed per trap method to provide as full a characterization of the arthropod diversity at the three types of riparian vegetation as possible (Moreno 2001; Walther and Moore 2005). To evaluate the consistency of our results if arthropod surveys were simplified, the diversity indicators were calculated for each taxo- nomic determination level (class, order and family), and the contribution of Berlese funnels and pitfall traps to arthropod data was independently tested. Due to taxonomical difficulties, springtails and mites were only determined at class and subclass level, respectively.
To explore the effects of A. donax on arthropods, arthropod abundance, diversity and composition were compared between vegetation types and rivers using generalised linear models (GLMs) followed by F tests. Quasipoisson error distribution was assumed for abundance and richness and Gaussian error distribu- tion for diversity. Taxonomical differences in macro- arthropod assemblies across treatments were visu- alised through a detrended correspondence analysis (DCA). For simplicity in community analyses, the family level was only used and data from the Berlese funnels were averaged between organic and mineral layers. DCA was preferred to constrained methods (e.g. RDA and CCA) because it accounted for the influence of explanatory factors not considered in the study (see details in ter Braak and Smilauer 2014). Also, unlike other unconstrained methods (e.g. NMDS), DCA axes can be interpreted as changes in units of beta diversity, indicating a full taxa replace- ment (no taxa in common) when the distance separat- ing samples is 4 SD. Arthropod data was log- transformed to satisfy statistical requirements (see further details on GLMs below). DCA scores were included in GLMs with Gaussian error distribution to test for differences in taxa composition between treatments. Similar results (not shown) were obtained using permutational analysis of variance (PERMA- NOVA). Individual GLMs with Quasipoisson error distribution were then used to identify the arthropod taxa responsible for the dissimilarities in the commu- nity between treatments. Differences in habitat fea- tures and soil properties between treatments were examined using Kruskal–Wallis tests followed by Mann–Whitney tests for par-wise comparisons. Since multiple comparisons inflate P values, these were corrected using the Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) procedure. The possible consequences of A. donax invasion for riparian food-webs were examined by comparing the trophic structure of arthropod assemblies and the mean body size of arthropods between invaded and un- invaded areas. Body size is related to the contribution of organisms to ecosystem processes, including the energy transfer from preys to consumers (Woodward et al. 2005). The weighted mean body length (MBD) such that MBD 1⁄4  Pi1⁄41 Li   ni  = Pi1⁄41 ni   (Wood- cok et al. 2009), where ni is the abundance of i-th taxa and Li the mean body length based on 20 individuals of this taxa (if available), was used as proxy of arthropod biomass. Some taxa were scarce and all individuals were sent to experts for identification and/or are now deposited in collections (see acknowledgements). Also, we preferred not to estimate arthropod biomass based on biometric data and linear regressions because equations were not available for our habitats and regions and they can be context-specific (Gowing and Recher 1985; Ganhiar 1997). Treatment effects on the trophic structure of arthropod assemblies were exam- ined by grouping taxa at the family level according to their trophic attributes. Mites and springtails were excluded from this analysis because they form too coarse a trophic group (e.g. Walter and Proctor 1999; Chahartaghi et al. 2005). For the remaining taxa, family level was used; macro-arthropods could be classified into relatively uniform trophic guilds that ranked on: scavengers/detritivorous, phytophagous, mycophagous, omnivorous, predators and parasitoids (e.g. Frampton et al. 2000; Tuttle et al. 2009). GLMs with binomial error distribution and Chi squared tests (v2) were used for comparisons of trophic guild proportions between treatments, whereas Gaussian error distribution and F tests were used for MBD.
Relationships between habitat features were explored using Spearman’s rho coefficients. Hierar- chical partitioning (HP) analyses of variance were then used to determine the relative contribution of vegetation type, river, patch size and the least correlated habitat features (|rho| \ 0.7) to changes in arthropod measures. Whilst causality cannot be determined in observational studies, HP models decompose the variation of dependent variables and identify their likely major drivers within a set of explanatory factors (Mac Nally 2002; Walsh and Mac Nally 2013). A minor rounding error is attributed to HP as the number of explanatory variables increases,
but this is unlikely in our case because the number of explanatory variables was within the recommended safety limit (\8 variables) (Mac Nally 2002; Walsh and Mac Nally 2013). All statistical analyses were performed in the R package (R Development Core Team 2013), using the ‘stats’, ‘car’, ‘vegan’ (Oksanen et al. 2013) and ‘hier.part’ (Walsh and Mac Nally 2013) libraries. Significance in HP analyses was based on the upper 0.95 confidence interval, but it was reached at P \ 0.05 in the remaining statistical procedures. GLM results were validated by visual inspection of the distribution of residuals, and by plotting the residuals against factors and fitted values. For all response variables, Durbin Watson tests showed no spatial autocorrelation in models residuals (P[0.05). Pair- wise comparisons in GLMs were performed with the function ‘contrast’ in R package that corrects P values for multiple comparisons (controls the false discovery rate) (Thomas et al. 2013).

xresults
A total of 1,379 macro-arthropods belonging to 5 classes, 15 orders and 25 families were collected in pitfall traps (Table 1, Appendix S2). In comparison, a total of 301,645 individuals m-3, belonging to 5 classes, 17 orders and 25 families, were live-extracted in Berlese funnels. Despite differences in total catches, taxa accumulation curves of both survey methods reached the asymptote at class and order levels (data not shown). At the family level, richness estimators indicated that 40 % of taxa present have been detected either using pitfall traps or Berlese funnels (Table 1, Appendix S2). Representatives of Dermaptera, Thy- sanoptera, Homoptera and Geophilomorpha were only captured in Berlese funnels, while those of Hetero- ptera were only detected in pitfall traps (see Appendix S2 for further details).
Changes in the abundance, diversity
and composition of arthropods between invaded and un-invaded riparian areas
Pitfall traps and Berlese funnels consistently detected differences in macro-arthropod abundance between vegetation types (Table 2), with the lowest abundance observed in A. donax soils (Contrast function, P \ 0.05) (Fig. 2). Both sampling procedures also showed significant differences in arthropod richness between vegetation types at order and family levels (Table 2), with the lowest diversity observed at both taxonomical levels in A. donax soils (Contrast func- tion, P \ 0.05) (Table 1). For pitfall traps and Berlese funnels, river also contributed to the overall differ- ences observed in abundance (Table 2). Pitfall traps also enabled detection of significant differences in arthropod diversity between vegetation types at order and family levels (Table 2), with an observed reduc- tion in arthropod diversity in A. donax soils (Contrast function, P \ 0.05). Results from Berlese funnels also consistently showed a reduction in arthropod diversity in the invaded soils that was evident at order and family levels in the organic and mineral layers of invaded plots (Table 2, Contrast function, P \ 0.05). Collembola showed a contrasting response with a significant increase in density in the organic layer of invaded plots but without any significant trend observed in the mineral layer (Table 2; Fig. 2).
Changes in the taxonomical structure of macro- arthropod communities were visualised in a (DCA, Fig. 3). Pitfall and Berlese funnel captures accounted for similar percentages of variance in taxa composition in axis 1 (12.2 and 13.2 %, respectively) and axis 2 (7.3 and 9.3 %, respec- tively). DCA also showed that a full taxa replace- ment did not occur in none of the treatments (\4 SD), and that differences in taxa composition between invaded and un-invaded areas were more evident in Berlese funnel captures. GLMs supported the fact that vegetation type significantly influenced the structure of arthropod assemblies (Table 3). Particular families (e.g. Glomeridae, Formicidae, Braconidae, Carabidae and Chthonnidae) contributed disproportionally to the variation in arthropod assemblies between vegetation types with decreased abundances in A. donax soils (Appendix S4). Interestingly, such reduction was not observed for many taxa captured in the Berlese funnels in the Vallvidrera stream (Appendix S4). Exploring the effects of A. donax on riparian food- webs
Results from pitfall traps and the Berlese funnels consistently showed that trophic guild proportions of macro-arthropods did not differ between vegetation types and rivers (Table 4; Fig. 4). However, in A. donax soils, there was a noticeable reduction in the
abundance of particular taxa within each trophic level (Appendix S4) and an absence of some taxa (e.g. Curculionidae, Silphidae, Porcellionidae and Litho- bidae), including representatives of an entire trophic group (parasitoids) (Appendix S2, Fig. 4). Lower values were also observed for the weighted mean body length index, used here as proxy of biomass, for pitfall trap captures in A. donax soils compared to native stands (Contrast function, P \ 0.01, Fig. 5). However, this trend was not observed for Berlese funnels (Table 4).
Differences in habitat features between invaded and un-invaded areas and relationships with soil arthropods
Invaded and un-invaded areas differed in vegetation structure features and leaf litter deposition but showed similar soil properties or their alterations were not consistent across rivers (Table 5). Specif- ically, A. donax plots had the lowest native plant
richness and the largest leaf litter deposition and soil carbon stock (Table 5). In contrast, the most diverse native flora and well developed understory occurred in ruderal plant areas, with the exception of the Vallvidrera stream in which only the wild black- berry (Rubus ulmifolius) was recorded (Table 5). Adjacent plant richness also differed between rivers with the highest richness observed in the Vallvidrera stream (Table 5). Significant correlations were detected between many habitat features (Appendix S5), including leaf litter deposition and soil carbon stock (Spearman’s rho = 0.71, P \ 0.01). Hierar- chical partitioning models, including the least correlated habitat features (|rho| \ 0.7),
vegetation type, patch size and river as explanatory factors, highlighted vegetation type followed by the local native plant species richness as the major drivers of most of the arthropod measures (Table 6; Fig. 6). River and adjacent plant richness were also major causal factors to variation in some arthropod com- munity measures (Table 6; Fig. 6). 

xdiscussion
The present study shows marked alterations in habitat and a negative relationship between the presence of A. donax and macro-arthropod abundance and diversity. Invaded areas also had a simplified macro-arthropod
community structure and smaller arthropods compared to native stands, further suggesting that A. donax is a potential threat to riparian ecosystems. These effects, however, were not mirrored in collembola that increased in number in A. donax soils. Our results therefore are discussed in relation to the possible mechanisms that can explain changes in arthropod assemblies and their implications for riparian food- webs.
Vegetation type and native plant species richness were found in this study to make the largest indepen- dent contribution to arthropod community features. This can be attributed to the fact that diverse plant communities supply a wide range of food resources to arthropods (Schaffers et al. 2008; Hengstum et al. 2014). Our findings are consistent with such associ- ation, since the lowest arthropod abundance and diversity was found in A. donax plots and the highest arthropod abundance and diversity occurred in the diverse native riparian areas. However, monospecific plant stands can also enhance arthropod abundance and diversity, which suggests that arthropod-plant
relationships can be case-specific (Wilkie et al. 2007; Schaffers et al. 2008). In fact, in the current study, the monospecific weedy community of Vallvidrera stream dominated by the wild blackberry (Rubus ulmifolius) had a high abundance and diversity of arthropods despite the absence of herbaceous understory as occurs in A. donax plots. Also, in this stream, leaf litter accumulation did not differ between R. ulmifolius and A. donax stands, which suggest that A. donax leaves may negatively affect arthropods. This is supported by Going and Dudley (2008) who experimentally demon- strated that A. donax leaves hinder macro-arthropods grazing and reduce their growth. A finding that is attributed to the high silica content, the presence of alkaloids and the low nutritional quality of A. donax tissues compared to native plants (Khuzhaev and Aripova 1994; Going and Dudley 2008). As well as a nutritional impact per se, the body size reduction of macro-arthropods observed in A. donax soils com- pared to native stands could be related to habitat alterations associated with the invasion, as the size spectrum of organisms generally decreases in dis- turbed habitats (Woodward et al. 2005).
Surprisingly, a positive relationship was found in our study between A. donax invasion and collembola density. Since this plant species has an extensive root system, collembola populations may have been enhanced by root exudates (Endlweber et al. 2009). In the current study, however, such a peak in their densities occurred in the organic layer (leaf litter) but not in the mineral layer. Although the reasons behind this remain unknown for our study, it may be related to the decomposition of the large leaf litter biomass deposited in A. donax soils, as it might have increased microbial populations and collembola feed on them (A’Bear et al. 2012). In particular, such an increase could be attributed to the fresh litter deposited in A. donax soils compared to the old litter of native stands, as microbial activity decreases in latter stages of the decomposition process (Torres et al. 2005). In our study area, the deposition of leaf litter occurs between September and December in deciduous trees, whereas during all the vegetative period in A. donax. However, leaf litter decomposi- tion is unlikely to be per se a major causal factor in our study. Deciduous forest and weedy areas showed an opposite pattern in leaf litter volume but both had elevated macro-arthropod abundance and diversity compared to A. donax.
Despite the fact that macro-arthropods abundance and diversity was negatively related to A. donax invasion in the three rivers surveyed for this study, the abundance of particular taxa (Glomeridae, Formici- dae, Elateridae and Carabidae) appeared to be less affected in the Vallvidrera stream. An obvious expla- nation could be the different size of riparian areas because of the migration of highly mobile taxa such as Formicidae and Carabidae from adjacent native forests; however, the plot size contributed little to variation in arthropod assemblies in our models. Nonetheless, the fact that plant richness of adjacent areas was retained as significant in some of our models suggest spill over of arthropods to be a plausible explanation, as reported for other ecosystems (Honnay et al. 1999; Rand et al. 2006). In our study, however, this may not explain trends in the abundance of these four taxa, as the millipedes Glomeridae have a more limited mobility than the beetles Carabidae (Eisenbeis and Wichard 2012). Even though this study did not examine the leaf litter composition, arthropods may have been favoured in the invaded areas of Vallvidrera stream by the incorporation of leaf litter from adjacent native riparian areas; for instance, the millipedes Glomeridae reportedly prefer feeding on a mixture of leaf litter, including leaves of the Mediterranean oak (Tajovsky 1992).
Changes in arthropod abundance and diversity could have direct implications for arthropod conser- vation (e.g. endangered taxa) (Kremen et al. 1993; Lambeets et al. 2008) but may also trigger multi- trophic impacts on ecosystems (Wardle et al. 2004; Gessner et al. 2010). Whilst major changes in the trophic structure of arthropod communities were not found in our study, the presence of A. donax was negatively related to the diversity, body size and captures of macro-arthropods, which may influence the organic matter cycle. Microbes are the major drivers of the decomposition process but this can be strongly influenced by alterations in arthropod bio- mass and composition (Crowther and A’Bear 2012; David 2014). However, our results showed that soil carbon stock was proportional to the leaf litter volume. This suggests that decomposition appeared not to be seriously compromised in A. donax soils (see Herrera and Dudley 2003; Riffaldi et al. 2010); a finding also in agreement with the high resilience of soil food-webs (Seta ̈la ̈ et al. 2005). Changes observed in the arthropod fauna could also affect vertebrates which live, or sporadically occur, in riparian areas and prey on highly mobile arthropods (Greenwood et al. 2004; Baxter et al. 2005; Pennington et al. 2008). The negative consequences of A. donax for these con- sumers will, however, ultimately depend on many factors, such as the habitat-specificity and the feeding preferences of each taxon, and the chances of foraging in non-invaded areas (Herrera and Dudley 2003; Greenwood et al. 2004).
Although our study shows relationships between A. donax invasion and riparian area properties in a snapshot of time, this study agrees with Herrera and Dudley (2003) who reported in summer a halving of arthropod abundance, richness and diversity in riparian areas invaded by A. donax in USA. In Mediterranean rivers, this season guarantees the representativeness of soil arthropod data because it is when the longest stable conditions are likely to occur (Gasith and Resh 1999). Interestingly, unlike Herrera and Dudley (2003), our study shows a stronger effect on soil arthropods and a different response of particular taxa (Armadillidae). This added to the fact that some alterations related to A. donax invasion were inconsistent across the three rivers surveyed for the current study provides further evidence that the effects of invasive species may be case-specific (Gonza ́ lez-Moreno et al. 2014). In conclusion, the large differences observed in habitat features and soil arthropods between relatively small patches with and without A. donax strongly suggests that this species can greatly modify riparian ecosys- tems if it displaces native vegetation. Nonetheless, our study design cannot fully rule out the possibility that differences between invaded and un-invaded areas existed prior to invasion. Grazing experiments and studies using food-web tracers are required for fully understanding the effects of A. donax on soil fauna and their implications for riparian ecosystem function.
