xabstract
1. Widespread stocking of fish into naturally fishless montane lakes has restructured their food webs by excluding invertebrate top predators and releasing smaller zooplankton from predation and com- petition. The persistence of non-native trout in these lakes may also compound the effects of global warming, such that current efforts to manage these two stressors independently may be ineffective. 2. We conducted a survey of 22 naturally fishless and stocked lakes positioned along an altitudinal (and thus climatic) gradient and a two-factor experiment using outdoor mesocosms. We hypothes- ised that stocked rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) increase the effects of higher temperature on zooplankton production in naturally fishless lakes by suppressing large invertebrates (e.g. Chaoborus), which then releases from predation smaller species that are more sensitive to warming. We also expected that introduced trout would stimulate primary production by suppressing larger grazers and increasing nutrient availability.
3. The survey confirmed that non-native trout and temperature are significant explanatory variables of zooplankton species turnover. Both lines of evidence agreed that the positive influence of higher temperature on total zooplankton biomass occurred only in the presence of non-native trout, probably because warming stimulated reproduction of smaller, herbivorous species that are favoured in lakes with stocked fish. Otherwise, the direct effects of higher temperatures on fishless communi- ties were negligible. The positive effect of fish on primary production also probably provided the extra food to support greater reproduction by these small herbivorous species under warmed conditions.
4. Stocking trout into naturally fishless montane lakes increases the sensitivity of their zooplankton to the otherwise subtle direct effects of higher temperature. The likely effect of global warming on food webs in montane lakes may depend on their trophic structure, and the destabilizing influence of introduced fish.

xintroduction
The stocking of naturally fishless mountain lakes around the world with fish to support recreational angling has been a common practice for several decades (Bahls, 1992;Miro &Ventura,2013).The fish are often non- native and are intentionally stocked at high density to maximise the likelihood of establishing self-sustaining populations (Strayer, 2010). Further, the global stocking rate of lakes and streams with non-native fish species
has more than doubled in the past 30 years (Gozlan et al., 2010). Despite the cessation of stocking in several protected areas and national parks, non-native popula- tions have persisted in many lakes (Armstrong & Knapp, 2004).
Non-native trout alter food webs and water quality in naturally fishless mountain lakes (Schindler & Parker, 2002; Eby et al., 2006; Crawford & Muir, 2008). The novel predator first typically suppresses large herbivorous zooplankton and macroinvertebrates that otherwise function as top predators in these lakes (Knapp, Matthews & Sarnelle, 2001; Schindler & Parker, 2002). Several smaller invertebrates, not vulnerable to the introduced fish, then thrive as they experience less competition and predation (Paul et al., 1995; Eby et al., 2006; Tiberti, von Hardenberg & Bogliani, 2014). Consequently, a net shift towards smaller, less efficient grazers (Brooks & Dodson, 1965) and enhanced nutri- ent recycling by the introduced fish can increase algal growth (Vanni & Layne, 1997; Parker & Schindler, 2006).
Non-native trout and climate warming may synergisti- cally affect communities in naturally fishless montane lakes (Pyke et al., 2008). For example, higher tempera- ture may exacerbate the effect of invasive fish (Rahel & Olden, 2008; Jansson et al., 2010) by increasing feeding rates (Jeppesen et al., 2010; Kratina et al., 2012) and nutrient recycling (Vanni, 2002). Similarly, non-native trout may increase the effect of warming on native com- munities by favouring small species that are more sensi- tive to temperature (Vinebrooke et al., 2004; Messner, MacLennan & Vinebrooke, 2013). Therefore, current efforts to manage invasive fish and climate warming independently may be ineffective (Alric et al., 2013).
The persistence of introduced trout in mountain lakes appears to compound the positive effects of higher lake temperature on the zooplankton, especially at lower alti- tude (Messner et al., 2013). To examine the robustness of these earlier correlative findings, we analysed data from another survey of 22 different mountain lakes located along an altitudinal (and therefore climatic) gradient. We also tested for the interactive effects of non-native rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and warming on planktonic food webs from five naturally fishless mon- tane lakes using an outdoor mesocosm experiment. Our primary hypothesis was that predation by O. mykiss would amplify the positive effect of high temperature on the zooplankton of naturally fishless montane lakes, because fish release smaller species that are more responsive to warming from competition and predation. We also hypothesised that O. mykiss would stimulate greater phytoplankton biomass by suppressing large herbivorous zooplankton and increasing nutrient avail- ability.

xmethods
Mountain lakes survey
From 14 to 18 July 2009, zooplankton samples were col- lected from 22 lakes in Banff and Yoho National Parks, including 12 naturally fishless lakes and 10 lakes con- taining non-native trout (mainly eastern brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis, and rainbow trout, but also cutthroat trout, Oncorhynchus clarki) (Table 1). The lakes span an altitudinal gradient of c. 1450 m and range in mean tem- perature from 4.9 to 18.7 °C (Table 1). Vertical hauls with a 30-cm-diameter, 63-lm mesh-sized conical net from 1 m off the lake bottom were used to collect quan- titative zooplankton samples that were preserved in the field in 70% ethanol. Water temperature profiles were measured at 1-m intervals from the surface of the lake to 1 m off the lake bottom using YSI Model 95 (YSI Incorporated, Yellow Springs, OH, U.S.A.). The epilim- nion was defined as the water from the surface to the depth where a >1 °C change per metre was observed and mean epilimnetic temperature was calculated for each lake.
Crustacean zooplankton were counted using a Leica MZ9s dissecting microscope at 32 times magnification. Specimens were identified to species when possible and genus otherwise (Edmondson, 1959). Samples were counted in their entirety. The lengths of the first 15 spec- imens of each developmental stage for each taxon were measured at 40 times magnification and used to derive biomass estimates using length–mass regressions (McCauley, 1984; Culver et al., 1985). Zooplankton mean weighted length (herein referred to as mean length for simplicity) was calculated as the product of the mean length of a zooplankton taxon and its proportional rela- tive abundance, summed across taxa. Zooplankton were classified as small herbivores, large daphniid grazers and omnivores/carnivores, based on functional charac- teristics such as body length, habitat, trophic group and feeding type (Barnett, Finlay & Beisner, 2007).
Analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) were performed using PASW" Statistics 18 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, U.S.A.) to test the direct and interactive effects of non-native trout and epilimnetic water temperature on zooplankton biomass and mean length. A significant interactive effect of introduced fish and the covariate temperature on total zooplankton biomass was found, so separate regressions were performed to test the influence of temperature on zooplankton biomass for lakes with invasive fish absent and present. The lack of a significant interactive effect of non-native trout and epilimnetic water temperature on zooplankton mean length indicated that the assumption of homogeneity of slopes was valid. Therefore, we performed an ANCOVA without an interaction term to assess the independent effects of invasive fish and temperature on mean length. Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) using CANOCO 5.03 (ter Braak & Smilauer, 2012) was then performed to examine the influence of non-native trout and epilimnetic temperature on zooplankton species composition relative to the other physical (i.e. lake sur- face area, maximum lake depth) and chemical (i.e. pH, total dissolved solids) variables measured. Although nutrient concentrations were not measured here, our earlier survey of 34 fishless and fish-stocked mountain lakes showed that total phosphorus and dissolved organic carbon concentrations were not significant pre- dictors of zooplankton biomass (Messner et al., 2013). A unimodal species response model was used for ordina- tion analyses because a preliminary analysis of the taxo- nomic data constructed a total primary gradient length of 4.1 standard deviation units (Smilauer & Leps, 2014). Zooplankton taxa that were detected in fewer than three lakes were excluded from the analysis, and biomasses were log10-transformed prior to analysis to down-weight the influence of dominant taxa. Forward selection using Monte Carlo permutation testing was performed to determine which environmental variables explained a significant amount of variance in the zooplankton com- positional data after adjusting the threshold significance level to control for the false discovery rate (Benjamini &
Hochberg, 1995). Grizzly, Laryx, McConnell and Rock Isle lakes had missing values for environmental predic- tors and were treated as supplementary cases in this ini- tial analysis. However, a subsequent ordination that included all lake cases was performed to isolate the influence of fish presence and epilimnetic water temper- ature, our variables of interest and the most significant explanatory predictors of species composition, while the other significant predictor, pH, was treated as a supple- mentary variable. Monte Carlo permutation testing was used to determine the significance of the first CCA axis and the overall ordination.
Mesocosm experiment
In July 2011, plankton were collected from five naturally fishless lakes in Banff National Park, Alberta, Canada – Copper (51°150 N: 155°550 W), Herbert (51°270 N: 116°130 W), Island (51°230 N: 116°60 W), Kingfisher (51°240 N: 116°100 W) and Lost (51°280 N: 116°160 W). Quan- titative plankton samples were taken by vertically haul- ing nets through the water column from 1 m off the lake bottom. On 13–14 July 2011, phytoplankton were col- lected using a 30-cm-diameter, 10-lm mesh-sized conical net. The number of vertical hauls needed to equal the volume of the mesocosms was first multiplied by four and then performed at each lake to compensate for a measured net efficiency of 25%. Phytoplankton collec- tions were passed through 63-lm sieve to remove zoo- plankton to prevent confounding our quantitative zooplankton collection. On 18–19 July 2011, zooplankton were collected using a 30-cm-diameter, 63-lm mesh- sized conical net assuming a net efficiency of 75% (McQueen & Yan, 1993). Phytoplankton and zooplank- ton samples were transported in 20-L plastic carboys back to the Barrier Lake Field Research Station along the eastern front range of the Rocky Mountains, where they were distributed to mesocosms on the evening of their collection.
Intermediate bulk containers (W40′′ 9 L48′′ 9 H40′′) made of translucent high-density polyethylene were used as experimental mesocosms. These units were entirely enclosed other than a 20-cm-diameter opening at the top that was covered with 1-mm mesh. Snowmelt water was collected from a nearby pond and then fil- tered through a 63-lm stainless sieve to prevent intro- duction of new zooplankton while filling each 1000 L capacity mesocosm. Each unit was aerated using a tube connected to an air pump to disturb the surface tension of the water and manually mixed twice daily. Plankton communities from each of the five lakes were distrib- uted among four mesocosms for a total of 20 units. Nat- ural densities of plankton were concentrated to a target of three zooplankters L 1 based on the mean density of zooplankton in the five lakes that was determined 1 week before collections.
The experiment followed a two-factor [(fish absent vs present) 9 (ambient temperature vs warmed)] random- ized-block (lake source of community) design with repeated measures. To establish the fish treatment, 10 mesocosms were randomly selected to remain fishless while the other 10 were stocked with a single rainbow trout (O. mykiss) fingerling (10–13 cm long) purchased from a local hatchery (Ackenberry Trout Farms, Cam- rose, AB, Canada). To simulate an allochthonous food subsidy and adhere to animal care protocol, each fish was fed 10–15 mg food pellets containing 1.2% phospho- rus twice a week (Hi-Pro Feeds Inc., Okotoks, AB, Canada). This feeding regime accounted for only 5% of the recommended daily food intake for the rainbow trout fingerlings (Hinshaw, 1990). Therefore, given that excretion of dissolved P by rainbow trout is negligible until the P requirement has been met (Sugiura, Dong & Hardy, 2000; Dalsgaard & Pedersen, 2011), we assumed high assimilation and retention of P by the fish (see Results).
The warming treatment consisted of 10 unheated mes- ocosms (mean 19.4 °C, ranging from 10.7 to 27.8 °C over the duration of the experiment) while the others were warmed by an average of 3.8 °C (mean 23.2 °C, ranging from 10.9 to 28.6 °C) using four, 300-watt aquarium heaters (Hagen", Montreal, QC, Canada). A mean tem- perature increase of 3.8 °C is within the range of pro- jected warming for 2055 in our study region (the high latitude mountains of North America) based on Atmo- sphere–Ocean General Circulation Models using four emission scenarios (A1FI, A2, B1 and B2) from the Inter- governmental Panel on Climate Change (Nogu es-Bravo et al., 2007). Insulative covers (Heatsheets" Survival Blanket; AFMInc, Petaluma, CA, U.S.A.) were also placed around the mesocosms to minimise diel fluctua- tions in water temperature and heat loss from warmed units. HOBO Pendant" data loggers (MA, U.S.A.) were deployed at a depth of 1 m in each mesocosm and recorded water temperatures at 1-h intervals.
Mesocosms were thoroughly mixed with a paddle, and then, the plankton was sampled using a hose attached to a built-in spigot at the base of each meso- cosm. Samples (40 L) of zooplankton were taken before treatments were applied (day 0) and at the mid-point of the experiment (day 21) with 80 L samples taken on the final day of the experiment (day 42). Zooplankton sam- ples were concentrated using a 63-lm mesh-sized sieve and preserved in 70% ethanol. On the initial (day 0), middle (21) and final (42) days of the experiment, phyto- plankton were concentrated by filtering 0.75–2.0 L sam- ples on to GF/F glass fibre filters (0.45-lm pore size), which were then frozen and kept in darkness. Filters were analysed for chlorophyll a concentration as a proxy for primary production using standard HPLC proce- dures (Vinebrooke & Leavitt, 1999). Unfiltered 500 mL water samples were also taken on the initial, middle and final days of the experiment and transported on ice to the Biogeochemical Analytical Facility at the University of Alberta, Edmonton (URL link: http://www.biol- ogy.ualberta.ca/basl) where they were chemically analy- sed for total phosphorus, total nitrogen and dissolved organic carbon concentrations.
Crustacean zooplankton were counted using a Leica MZ9s dissecting microscope at 32 times magnification (a minimum of 300 individuals per sample). Samples con- taining more than 300 individuals were mixed, so that the zooplankton was evenly distributed and a minimum of two subsamples were counted. Subsamples were counted in their entirety, and subsampling continued until the standard error of the total number of individu- als per subsample was <10% of the mean number of individuals counted per subsample (Bade, Houser & Scanga, 1998). To ensure detection of rare species, the remainder of the sample was examined for species that were not found in the completed subsamples or of which <5 individuals were found. The lengths of the first 15 specimens of each developmental stage for each taxon were measured at 40 times magnification, and bio- mass was estimated using length–mass regressions (McCauley, 1984; Culver et al., 1985). We used the ratio of zooplankton biomass to phytoplankton biomass (BZ: BP) as an indicator of trophic structure and potential grazing pressure by zooplankton. Measured chlorophyll a concentrations were converted into phytoplankton bio- mass using a conversion factor of 66 (Havens & Beaver, 2013; Vijverberg et al., 2014).
Linear mixed models were performed using PASW" Statistics 18 (SPSS Inc.) to test for time-dependent direct and interactive effects of non-native trout and warming on total zooplankton biomass, Chaoborus spp. biomass, zooplankton mean length, chlorophyll a concentration, TP, TN and DOC (Zuur et al., 2009). Experimental treatments were treated as fixed variables and sampling occasion as a covariate. Random block (i.e. lake source) effects were tested by comparing models without and with a random block effect. The model without a random block effect was used because it minimised the Akaike’s Information Criterion corrected for small sam- ple size (AICc) based on restricted maximum likelihood estimation. Individual mesocosm was treated as a ran- dom factor, and to account for potential temporal autocorrelation from repeated measures, several error covariance structures were tested, including autoregres- sive structures with homogeneous and heterogeneous variances. The covariance structure that minimised the AICc was used.
All variables were log10-transformed prior to analysis to test the multiplicative null expectation of net stressor effects. The multiplicative model tests the hypothesis that the effect of one stressor acts probabilistically on the effect of another to generate their net effect according to the equation:
PAB 1⁄4 PA þð1 PAÞ0PB 1⁄4 PA þPB  PA 0PB
where PAB is the proportional effect of both stressors combined, PA is the proportional effect of stressor A alone, and PB is the proportional effect of stressor B alone (Folt et al., 1999; Dunne, 2010). In contrast, the more commonly used additive model tests the hypo- thesis that the total effect of stressors is equal to the sum of their individual effects (Folt et al., 1999) according to the equation:
PAB 1⁄4 PA þ PB
However, the additive model was problematic in our study because it predicted net effects that exceeded 100% loss for some of our response variables that are necessarily non-negative, such as species density and mean species length (Sih, Englund & Wooster, 1998). To avoid illogical predictions, we chose the multiplicative model, which never predicts a combined stressor effect larger than 100% loss. For example, if stressor A reduces the population size of a species by 60% and stressor B reduces it by 70%, the additive model predicts that the combined effect of the stressors is 130% loss; however, a negative population size is clearly impossible. In con- trast, the multiplicative model predicts that the com- bined effect of the stressors will reduce the population size by 88%.
Partial redundancy analysis (RDA) was performed to examine the influence of non-native trout and tempera- ture on zooplankton species composition on the final day of the experiment, with the blocking variable, lake source, treated as a covariate. A linear species response model was used for ordination analyses because a preli- minary analysis of the taxonomic data constructed a total primary gradient length of 2.6 standard deviation units (Smilauer & Leps, 2014). Zooplankton taxa that were detected in fewer than three mesocosms on the final day of the experiment were excluded from the analysis, and biomasses were log10-transformed prior to analysis to down-weight the influence of dominant taxa. Forward selection using Monte Carlo permutation test- ing was performed to determine whether treatment explained a significant amount of variance in zooplank- ton species composition. Monte Carlo permutations were also used to test the significance of the first CCA axis and the overall ordination.

xresults
Lakes survey
Total zooplankton biomass increased significantly with higher epilimnetic temperature only when trout were present (ANCOVA Fish 9 Temperature F1,18 = 33.16, P < 0.001; Fish present: r2 = 0.79, P = 0.001) (Fig. 1a). In comparison, temperature had little effect on zooplankton biomass under fishless conditions (Fish absent: r2 = 0.002, P = 0.91). Zooplankton mean body size signif- icantly decreased with fish (ANCOVA Fish F1,19 = 11.92, P = 0.003) and temperature (ANCOVA Temperature F1,19 = 6.03, P = 0.02) (Fig. 1b). The presence of non-native trout and epilimnetic water temperature, followed by pH, explained the great- est amount of variance in zooplankton species composi- tion across lakes based on a forward selection criterion (Fig. 2; Table 2). Fish status explained 18.8% and lake temperature 17.6% of species variance. Non-significant variables excluded from the final CCA were maximum lake depth, altitude, total dissolved solids and lake sur- face area (Table 2). CCA axis 1 was significant (F = 4.00, P = 0.002), capturing 18.3% of total species variance and being best defined by the fish status of the lake. CCA axis 2 captured 16.3% of total species turnover, and the overall ordination was also significant (F = 4.80, P = 0.002). In general, smaller zooplankton species were posi- tively associated with the presence of introduced trout (Fig. 2). The zooplankton of stocked lakes consisted mainly of a variety of small herbivores (e.g. Bosmina lon- girostris, Ceriodaphnia, Daphnia rosea) and the herbivorous early stages of copepods (i.e. cyclopoid and calanoid nauplii and copepodids). In contrast, the communities of fishless lakes contained mainly larger and often heavily pigmented Daphnia spp., Hesperodiaptomus arcticus and Chydorus sphaericus.
The secondary environmental gradient of lake temper- ature differentiated species characteristic of cold, alpine lakes from those in warmer, montane lakes. Cold-water communities consisted primarily of relatively large Daphnia middendorffiana and the omnivorous top preda- tor H. arcticus. In contrast, warmer montane communi- ties contained the top predator Chaoborus and a greater diversity of relatively small herbivores, such as Alona and Daphnia catawba.
Mesocosm experiment
The significant positive effect of introduced fish on total zooplankton biomass also increased the otherwise unde- tectable effect of warming by the end of the experiment (Table 3; Fig. 3a). Oncorynchus mykiss eliminated the largest invertebrate predator, larvae of the dipteran Chaoborus, by day 21 (Fig. 3b). Therefore, the synergistic positive response of zooplankton to the combined effect of trout and warming was attributable to the increase in crustacean zooplankton. In particular, both O. mykiss and warming shifted communities towards small zoo- plankton (Table 3; Fig. 3c). The shift towards smaller zooplankton occurred most rapidly under combined exposure to fish and warming, but the final body length
of zooplankton was similar across single- and dual-stres- sor treatments (Fig. 3c).
The presence of O. mykiss, but not warming, signifi- cantly decreased BZ:BP by disproportionately increasing chl a-inferred total phytoplankton biomass throughout most of the experiment (Table 3; Fig. 3d–e). However, warming reversed the suppression of BZ:BP by invasive fish on day 42, owing to increased zooplankton biomass (post hoc ANOVA Fish 9 Temperature F1,16 = 5.07, P = 0.04) (Fig. 3a, d). Otherwise, neither treatment sig- nificantly affected the other measured chemical variables (Table 3). In particular, lack of a significant difference in P concentration across stocked (4.11 ` 0.25 lg L 1) and non-stocked mesocosms (7.32 ` 1.02 lg L 1) supported our earlier assumption of high assimilation and retention of P by the fish.
The four treatment combinations explained a signifi- cant amount of variance in zooplankton species compo- sition by the end of the experiment (F = 8.20, Padj = 0.008) (Fig. 4). RDA axes 1 and 2 accounted for 54.0% and 7.1% of the total variance in species data, respectively. RDA axis 1 was significant (F = 14.10, P = 0.002), as was the overall ordination (F = 6.6, P = 0.002).
The zooplankton exposed simultaneously to both stres- sors was further displaced from the controls in ordination space than were communities exposed to introduced trout or warming only (Fig. 4). In particular, O. mykiss combined with warming shifted communities towards smaller herbivores (i.e. Chydorus sphaericus and Acroperus harpae). In comparison, the presence of O. mykiss alone favoured smaller omnivores (i.e. Diacyclops thomasi and Cyclops vernalis) and early herbivorous life stages of co- pepods. Warming alone had the least effect on species composition.

xdiscussion
Experimental findings supported the hypothesis gener- ated from our earlier surveys, namely that invasive fish
increase thermal sensitivity in the zooplankton of natu- rally fishless montane lakes. Both lines of evidence agreed that the presence of introduced trout drove the positive effect of higher temperature on total zooplank- ton biomass, and also its effect on species composition. Otherwise, the direct effects of higher temperature on communities in fishless lakes were negligible. Size-selec- tive predation by O. mykiss eliminated the top inverte- brate predator and, as with warming, favoured smaller zooplankton. The shift towards a smaller body size was attributable to increased production of herbivorous early life stages of copepods, and a greater diversity of smaller herbivores. Introduction of O. mykiss also altered trophic structure primarily by stimulating the phyto- plankton; however, warming reversed this effect by the end of the experiment by disproportionately increasing zooplankton biomass and potential grazing pressure.
The greater sensitivity of smaller-bodied species to warming can account for why the positive effect of higher temperatures on zooplankton biomass was only observed in the presence of an invasive fish (Daufresne, Lengfellner & Sommer, 2009; Yvon-Durocher et al., 2011). Exclusion of Chaoborus by introduced visually feeding fish would have released the smaller and less conspicuous zooplankton from predation (Hanazato & Yasuno, 1989). Further, suppression of larger daphniids by the zooplanktivorous fish probably released the smaller herbivores from competition (Brooks & Dodson, 1965; Hart & Bychek, 2011). Smaller-bodied zooplankton are not only more tolerant of higher temperature than larger species but also metabolically more sensitive to higher temperature, as warming disproportionately accelerates their development and reproduction (Moore, Folt & Stemberger, 1996). For example, Chydorus sphaeri- cus and Acroperus harpae thrived in the presence of both O. mykiss and warmer conditions, which reflects how their generation times decline logarithmically with increasing temperature (Bottrell, 1975; Gillooly, 2000; Gillooly et al., 2002). Further, increased algal food pro- duction in the presence of introduced trout would have
provided the resources to support a greater abundance of small herbivores. Small zooplankton also cycle more nutrients than large species, and nutrient recycling by zooplankton and fish occurs more quickly at higher tem- peratures (Moore et al., 1996).
The broad tolerance of Daphnia to thermal variation may explain the apparent insensitivity of the zooplank- ton of fishless systems to higher temperature. Although our survey findings highlight the importance of temper- ature as a driver of zooplankton species turnover across a large spatial scale, moderate warming in our experi- ment had little effect on fishless communities dominated by Daphnia. Phenotypic plasticity may have enabled Daphnia to respond adaptively to higher temperature, their maximum body size and mean generation time declining (Orcutt & Porter, 1984; McKee & Ebert, 1996). Indeed, shifts towards smaller adults and/or an increased proportion of juveniles could account for the significant decline in mean body length with warming (Daufresne et al., 2009). Similarly, large Daphnia occur in subtropical lakes, despite their high temperature, but only if fish are absent (Iglesias et al., 2011). These findings support the view that, at least in the near future, the direct effects of global warming on the communities of naturally fishless lakes will probably be small (McKee et al., 2002). However, the potential for non-native trout and other environmental drivers (e.g. Weidman et al., 2014) to synergistically increase the effects of warming on fishless mountain lakes suggests that indirect effects of global warming may be of much greater concern.
Suppression of large Daphnia grazers and a corre- sponding decrease in BZ:BP can explain the positive influence of non-native trout on primary production (Parker & Schindler, 2006). Top-down control by fish can account for the observed decrease in the abundance of Daphnia, the reduced mean body size of the zooplank- ton and lower grazing pressure by zooplankton on phy- toplankton (Jeppesen et al., 2007). Nutrient recycling by fish may also have contributed to increased primary pro- duction (Vanni & Layne, 1997), but the absence of changes in TP and TN suggests that consumer-mediated fish effects were relatively more important.
Higher temperature appeared to stimulate the feeding rate of fish, as shifts towards smaller zooplankton occurred most rapidly in the dual-stressed treatment (Jeppesen et al., 2010), suggesting that warming strength- ened top-down effects of introduced fish, as observed elsewhere (Kratina et al., 2012; Alric et al., 2013). How- ever, by the end of the experiment, the synergistic increase of small zooplankton under dual-stressed conditions reversed the suppression of BZ:BP by non- native trout. Despite this, chl a concentrations were unaffected, probably because of the absence of effective large-bodied Daphnia grazers and the proliferation of large, inedible algae that small zooplankton species were unable to consume (Hansson, Bergman & Cronberg, 1998; Havens & Beaver, 2013).
Our discovery that non-native trout enhance the effects of higher temperature on montane lake food webs adds to the growing evidence that interactions among stressors often produce unexpected net effects in the sensitive communities of mountain lakes (Thompson, Jacques & Vinebrooke, 2008; Weidman et al., 2014). Fur- ther, the subtle direct effect of high temperature high- lights the potential for forecasts of the effects of global warming to underestimate the actual outcome if the potential amplifying influences of other stressors are not considered. Therefore, our findings underscore the importance of managing non-native species in the con- text of other significant drivers of environmental change.
