xabstract
Introduced largemouth bass (
Micropterus salmoides
spp.) and bluegill (
Lepomis macrochirus
spp.) are
thought to threaten native aquatic organisms worldwide and hence their eradication has recently begun
in Japan. Our previous studies suggested that the removal of largemouth bass increases native fish, shrimp,
dragonflies, and exotic crayfish, but decreases macrophytes. To test this prediction, we removed the exotic
fishes by draining farm ponds and compared the numbers of these organisms before and after the drain,
as well as between drained and undrained ponds. The number of dragonfly
Pseudothemis zonata
, crayfish,
shrimp, and goby increased rapidly after the drain, but the coverage of macrophyte declined. The reduction
in macrophyte is assumed to be caused by increased herbivory by crayfish. The number of exuviae of
damselfly
Cercion calamorum
and the total number of species of odonate also decreased after the drain.
These decreases can be due to the reduction of macrophyte because reduced odonate species are known
to use macrophytes as oviposition sites. Therefore, the removal of largemouth bass has a potential to cause
negative effects on some native organisms. We propose that reduction of exotic crayfish should be
considered when eradicating the exotic fishes.

xintroduction
The extinction of native species and the global homogenization
of biota induced by species invasion have been
the major factors that have led to losses in biodiversity
(Pimm 1991; Vitousek
et al
. 1996; Williamson 1996).
Programs to resolve invasive species problems are
increasingly important for the conservation and management
of native biodiversity. Four major steps for
dealing with aliens are: prevention, early detection,
eradication, and control (Wittenberg & Cock 2001).
The best solution is to prevent the introduction of
exotic species, but once introduced, eradication might
be effective (Myers
et al
. 2000).
However, it should be noted that the eradication of
exotic species occasionally results in undesired changes
in native communities (Zavaleta
et al
. 2001). Firstly, the
removal of an exotic can enhance secondary establishment
or increase other exotic species, which then
decreases native organisms. Secondly, eradication can
reduce populations of native species if the target exotic
performs functions that are similar to those of native
species that are no longer in the local environment.
Largemouth bass (
Micropterus salmoides
spp.) and
bluegill (
Lepomis macrochirus
spp.) are notorious predators
that can change community structure both
directly and indirectly (e.g. largemouth bass: Power
et al
. 1985; Carpenter & Kitchell 1993; bluegill: Hambright
et al
. 1986), and have been introduced in over
50 and 20 countries, respectively (Welcomme 1992).
Largemouth bass becomes a typical piscivore (Keast &
Webb 1966) and bluegill an omnivore (Azuma 1992).
In Japan, these fishes have become widely established
and the native biodiversity is known to be decreasing in
many freshwater systems where largemouth bass and
bluegill have been introduced (Azuma 1992; National
Federation of Inlandwater Fisheries Cooperatives
1992). As a consequence, eradication of largemouth
bass and bluegill has recently begun in some regions in
Japan. However, the removal of these fishes can increase
the populations of other exotic species including red
swamp crayfish (
Procambarus clarkii
spp.) and bullfrog
(
Rana catesbeiana
spp.), and hence, can cause a negative
secondary effect on native organisms because these
exotics are known to be preyed upon by largemouth
bass and bluegills in their native range (Lewis
et al
.
1961; Kruse & Francis 1977; Huner 1988). Therefore,
to restore native biodiversity, it seems essential to clarify
the community-wide impacts by the exotic fishes,
including any interactions between the exotic fishes and
other exotic species before the eradication.
Previous studies indicated that largemouth bass
reduced aquatic organisms (native fish, shrimp,
nymphal odonate, and exotic crayfish) by top-down
effect, while it increased larval chironomids, oligochaeta,
and macrophytes by trophic cascade (Maezono &
Miyashita 2003; Maezono 2003). Therefore, we expect
that the removal of largemouth bass by pond draining
increases native fish, shrimp, nymphal odonate, and
exotic crayfish, which then decreases benthic chironomids,
oligochaeta, and macrophytes. The aim in the
present study is to test this prediction at the scale of a
whole pond, and to verify secondary negative impacts
on natives due to the exotic fishes removal.

xmethods
Field studies were conducted in farm ponds in
Namegawa Town, Saitama Prefecture, eastern Japan,
where there are numerous farm ponds. The ponds are
small with relatively low turbidity and their physicochemical
environments appear to be similar. Largemouth
bass and bluegills were established in this area
in the 1970s (Matsumoto pers. comm.). The exotic red
swamp crayfish (
Procambarus clarkii
spp.), bullfrogs
(
Rana catesbeiana
spp.), deep-bodied crusian carp
(
Carassius cuvieri
spp.), rosy bitterling (
Rhodeus ocellatus
ocellatus
spp.), and common carp (
Cyprinus carpio
spp.) were already introduced and established in this
area before the introduction of largemouth bass and
bluegill. We chose six ponds (A-F, area: 3000–5000 m
2
)
with exotic fishes and floating-leaved macrophyte,
Trapa japonica
spp.. We recognized the presence of
largemouth bass and bluegill in these ponds by electrofishing
in August 1999. Ponds A, B, C were drained
completely by pond managers in September 2000, September
1999, and October 1999, respectively (treatment),
while the three remaining ponds (D, E, and F)
were not drained (control). The water in the drained
ponds was kept empty for 2 weeks and recovered full
level by rainfall within 2 months after the draining. To
verify the absence of largemouth bass and bluegill in
the drained ponds, electrofishing was conducted within
2 years after pond draining. We found no largemouth
bass and bluegills in these ponds.
We chose
T. japonica
spp., odonates (i.e.
Pseudothemis
zonata
spp.,
Cercion calamorum
spp.,
Cercion hieroglyphicum
spp., and
Anax parthenope
spp.), shrimp
(
Palaemon paucidens
spp.), red swamp crayfish (
Procambarus
clarkii
spp.), and goby (
Rhinogobius
spp.) as
target species, because (i) the seeds of
T. Japonica
spp.
can survive in drained ponds (Kadono 1998); (ii) adult
odonates can fly from other farm ponds (Takasaki
1994); (iii) the crayfish can move on the ground (Ban
1980), and (iv) shrimps and the goby can go up water
gates from downstream (Maezono pers. obs.). We surveyed
target organisms for 5 years (1998–2002). The
coverage of macrophytes was estimated from photographs
taken from the same positions every July.
Aquatic organisms were collected by 20 minnow-traps
(25
¥
40
¥
25 cm, mesh size: 2 mm) from each of six
ponds every July Organisms other than crayfish were
captured in the daytime. Traps were submerged into
each pond at 3 m off from the shoreline with a spacing
of more than 5 m between the traps, and were retrieved
half an hour later. Because crayfish is more active at
night (Huner 1988), they were captured by submerging
the traps in the ponds overnight. Relative densities of
aquatic organisms were estimated as the number of
organisms captured per trap. We collected exuviae of
odonates attaching to bank, terrestrial plants and submerged
macrophytes along the shoreline (20 m) of each
pond in June and July.
Using these data (drained year and the next 2 years),
repeated-measures
ANOVA
’s were conducted, with
draining as a main factor. In Odonata, we used the data
of
Pseudothemis zonata
spp. and
Cercion calamorum
spp.
collected in July. A repeated-measures
ANOVA
was also
conducted for the number of species of Odonata (data
in June and July combined).


xresults
Changes in the abundance of organisms in drained
ponds appeared to be clearly classified into two groups;
those whose numbers increased and those whose numbers
decreased after the pond draining (Fig. 1).
Repeated-measures
ANOVA
showed that both macrophyte
coverage and the number of exuviae of the damselfly
C. calamorum
spp. differed significantly between
the drained and undrained ponds. The interactions
between treatment (drained or undrained) and time
(drained year and the next 2 years) were also significant,
indicating that the reduction of macrophyte coverage
and number of
C. calamorum
spp. became more
pronounced with years after the pond draining
(Table 1, Fig. 1). The number of dragonfly
P. zonata
spp., shrimp, crayfish, and goby differed significantly
between drained and undrained ponds. The interactions
between treatment and time were significant indicating
that these organisms increased with years after the pond
draining (Table 1, Fig. 1). The number of odnate species
decreased markedly in the drained ponds just after
the draining and kept the low level for 2 years thereafter
(Fig. 2). Repeated-measures
ANOVA
showed that the
number of odonate species differed significantly
between drained and undrained ponds (betweensubject
effect:
F
1,2
=
20.800,
P
=
0.010), and withinsubject
effects were also significant (Time:
F
2,8
=
17.179
P
=
0.001; Time
¥
drain:
F
2,8
=
10.750
P
=
0.005), indicating that the reduction in the number
of species became more pronounced with years after
the draining (Fig. 2).

xdiscussion
The present study tested the prediction derived from
the previous studies that the removal of exotic fishes
increases some species of animals, while decreased
macrophytes (Maezono & Miyashita 2003; Maezono
2003). As expected, we found increases in the number
of native fish, shrimp, nymphal dragonfly (
P. zonata
),
and crayfish, while macrophyte decreased after the
draining (Fig. 1). The reduction in coverage of
T. japonica
spp. after the pond drain (Fig. 1) does not
seem to have been caused by changes in physicochemical
factors in ponds after the draining, but seems to be
because of the increased herbivory by exotic crayfish
for the following reasons: firstly,
T. japonica
spp. is usually
known not to be affected by changes in physicochemical
factors in ponds after the drain (Kadono
1998), and secondly, crayfish is known to reduce macrophyte
biomass (e.g. Hill & Lodge 1995; Gutiérrez-
Yurrita
et al
. 1998).
We obtained additional findings that the abundance
of some species of Odonata decreased unexpectedly.
The number of exuviae of
C. calamorum
spp. and the
number of odonate species such as
C. hieroglyphicum
spp. and
Anax parthenope
spp. decreased after pond
draining, although the number of
P. zonata
increased.
Thus, the exotic fishes do not appear to control the
number of
C. calamorum
spp.,
C. hieroglyphicum
spp.
,
and
A. parthenope
spp. in farm ponds. It is likely that
macrophytes sustained populations of these decreased
odonate species, because these odonates are known to
use living tissues of macrophytes as oviposition sites
(Sugimura
et al
. 1999). This inference is further supported
by the fact that
P. zonata
which showed increase
after the removal of exotic fishes, do not use macrophytes
(Takasaki 1994; Sugimura
et al
. 1999).
The finding that the removal of largemouth bass
increases exotic crayfish and then reduces macrophytes
and macrophyte-dependent odonates provokes important
conservation issues. Firstly, half the number of
Japanese odonate species use farm ponds as main habitats
(Takasaki 1994), and many rare species of aquatic
plants distribute only in farm ponds (Kadono 1998).
Secondly, macrophytes perform various functions in
aquatic ecosystems (e.g. Pip & Stewart 1976; Crowder
& Cooper 1982; Werner
et al
. 1983; Carpenter &
Lodge 1986; Momot 1995; Scheffer
et al
. 2001).
Because bass and crayfish already coexist worldwide
(e.g. Kenya: Hickley
et al
. 1994; Spain: Nicola
et al
.
1996; Portugal: Godinho & Ferreira 1994), these secondary
impacts caused by the eradication of largemouth
bass will occur frequently.
To avoid these unwanted outcomes, it is necessary
to control the abundance of crayfish after the eradication
of the exotic fish when a species of conservation
interest has a possibility of being under serious impact
by crayfish, such as macrophytes or macrophytesdependent
odonates. It should be noted that, to keep
the crayfish population density at a low level, we need
to remove them continuously for a long period because
crayfish have a high fecundity (Momot 1995) and a
high potential of recolonization by moving on land (Ban
1980; Gherardi & Barbaresi 2000). The removal of
crayfish seems to be feasible in small lentic systems, but
complete removal from a whole lake seems impossible.
In such situations, intensive and continuous removal
should be conducted around the area where target
native species inhabit.