xabstract
Flow diversion and invasive species are two major threats to freshwater ecosystems, threats that restoration efforts attempt to redress. Yet, few restoration projects monitor whether removal of these threats improve target characteristics of the ecosystem. Fewer still have an appropriate experimental design from which causal inferences can be drawn as to the relative merits of removing exotic ﬁsh, restoring ﬂow, or both. We used a dam decommissioning in Fossil Creek, Arizona, to compare responses of native ﬁsh to exotic ﬁsh removal and ﬂow restoration, using a beforeafter-control-impact design with three impact treatments: ﬂow restoration alone where exotics had not been present, ﬂow restoration and exotic ﬁsh removal, and ﬂow restoration where exotics remain and a control reach that was unaffected by restoration actions. We show that removal of exotic ﬁsh dramatically increased native ﬁsh abundance.
Flow restoration also increased native ﬁsh abundance, but the effect was smaller than that from removing exotics. Flow restoration had no effect where exotic ﬁsh remained, although it may have had other beneﬁts to the ecosystem. The cost to restore ﬂow ($12 million) was considerably higher than that to eradicate exotics ($1.1 million). The long-term inﬂuence of ﬂow restoration could increase, as travertine dams grow and re-shape the creek increasing habitat for native ﬁsh. But in the 2-year period considered here, the return on investment for extirpating exotics far exceeded that from ﬂow restoration. Projects aimed to restore native ﬁsh by restoring ﬂow should also consider the additional investment required to eradicate exotic ﬁsh.

xintroduction
Stream ecosystems worldwide are threatened by water extraction, habitat alteration, spread of invasive species, and decline in water quality (Allan & Flecker 1993; Dynesius & Nilsson 1993; Richter et al. 1997). Freshwater species are among the most endangered groups of organisms worldwide (Miller et al. 1989; Williams & Miller 1990) with native ﬁsh in arid regions particularly threatened (Minckley & Deacon 1991; Moyle 1995; Olden & Poff 2005). More than $10 billion have been spent on stream restoration in the United States in the last decade, yet fewer than 10% of projects monitor if interventions are successful (Bernhardt et al. 2005; Palmer et al. 2005). Treating large restoration projects and other management interventions as ecological experiments is arguably the
best way to understand ecosystems at scales relevant to policy (MacMahon & Holl 2001; Hart et al. 2002; Poff et al. 2003). Although many streams face multiple threats, their relative magnitudes and the costs to reverse them are rarely quantiﬁed. This study capitalized on a large restoration program surrounding a hydropower decommissioning in Fossil Creek, Arizona, to illustrate how a simple cost-beneﬁt analysis can guide restoration investments. Restoration included returning ﬂow to the entire stream below the now defunct hydropower diversion dam and eradicating exotic ﬁsh from a 15-km subreach (Fig. 1). Fossil Creek is a model system to compare the costs and beneﬁts of restoration interventions because (1) research prior to restoration estimated the magnitude of two ubiquitous threats (water diversion and exotic ﬁsh), yielding clear predictions of native ﬁsh responses to reversal of each threat; (2) the monetary costs of ﬂow restoration and exotic ﬁsh removal were independent, enabling a simple costbeneﬁt analysis; and (3) native ﬁsh densities were measured before and after restoration to test predictions and quantify the beneﬁts to native ﬁsh of restoration investments. This study addressed the following questions: How did native ﬁsh respond to ﬂow restoration and the removal of exotic species? What were the relative costs and beneﬁts
of ﬂow restoration and exotic species removal on recovering native ﬁsh? Did pre-restoration threats assessments predict actual responses? Adaptive management requires that management proposals are accompanied by concise hypotheses predicting how ecosystems will respond to management interventions (Holling 1973). Yet, there are few examples in river restoration which complete a full adaptive management cycle from generating hypotheses about how ecosystems will respond to interventions, evaluating and learning from actual responses and applying the knowledge to future management actions both in the system that is tested and in other systems (Palmer et al. 2005). Here, we complete a full cycle using prerestoration studies to generate predictions of how native ﬁsh would respond to increased ﬂow and removal of exotics coupled with a cost-beneﬁt analysis relating ﬁnancial investments with ﬁsh recovery. Results from this study have the potential to guide river restoration projects where managers are considering improving habitat quality and or removing exotic ﬁsh.

xmethods
Experimental Design We used a modiﬁed before-after-control-impact(BACI) design to measure ﬁsh responses to restoration (Stewart-Oaten et al. 1986; Underwood 1991; Underwood 1994; Schmitt & Osenberg 1996). This design compared ﬁsh responses in reaches that experienced restoration actions with a control reach with no interventions. BACI designs are used to differentiate natural variability in ﬁsh densities from variability likely caused by restoration actions (Schmitt & Osenberg 1996). This study revisited predictions made and published as technical reports prior to restoration, as a “threats assessment” conducted in conjunction with the environmental impact assessment, required by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for the hydropower dam decommissioning (Marks et al. 2003; Marks et al. 2005). Predictions were based on ﬁsh distributions and stable isotope analysis of food web structure in pristine and disturbed reaches of Fossil Creek prior to restoration
Study Site The hydrology of the river was disturbed from 1915 to 2005 because a diversion dam and ﬂume built less than 1 km downstream of the source springs diverted most of the ﬂow to make hydroelectric power (Fig. 1). The reach above the dam remained relatively pristine with full ﬂows (1,218 Ls−1) and no exotic ﬁsh, and served as a reference site. Water diversionbelowthedam createdtwodistinctﬂowregimes.The 6.5 km reach directly below the dam received only seepage ﬂow (5.6 Ls−1). The majority of ﬂow was diverted through a ﬂume to the Irving Power Plant where a portion was returned to the stream for a combined ﬂow of 62.2 Ls−1 and the remaining ﬂow was re-diverted to a second power plant (Childs) on the Verde River. This lower reach of partially diverted ﬂows continued for 15 km to the conﬂuence with the Verde River (Fig. 1). Exotic ﬁsh (primarily Micropterus dolemieu [smallmouth bass] and Lepomis cyanellus [green sunﬁsh]), likely invaded from the Verde River, and were present in the lower 22 km of the river. The distribution of ﬂows and non-native species prior to restoration resulted in three distinct reaches (1) full ﬂows (1,218 Ls−1) and no nonnative ﬁsh (control reach); (2) extreme water diversion with non-natives absent; (3) extreme and partial water diversion with non-natives present. Flow was restored to reaches two and three and non-native ﬁsh were removed from part of reach three, creating four restoration treatments: (1) control; (2) ﬂow restored—no non-native ﬁsh; (3) ﬂow restored—non-native ﬁsh removed, and ﬂow restored non-native ﬁsh remain. Unlike many dams, the Fossil Creek dam creates a very small reservoir (<1 acre), because water was immediately diverted through a ﬂume and transported to two hydropower dams. Geomorphic studies indicate that the effects of the dam on ﬂow, substrate, and channel width only extend 200 m above the dam (Monroe 2002; Schlinger et al. 2002). Most of the control reach was above this section and was not noticeably inﬂuenced by the dam. The dam was in place through the duration of this study so the only changes above the dam are due to natural variation. To test whether dependent variables in restored sites converge on the control, we used a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) designed to accompany the extended BACI design, where sample sites are nested within restoration treatments, and time (annual samples) is nested within “before or after” treatment (Keough & Quinn 2000). Although some researchers argue for using additional rivers as controls in BACI designs, there are no streams in the region with an intact assemblage of native ﬁsh. Because the focus of this research is to study changes in native species before and after restoration, it is imperative that species composition is similar among treatments. Fossil Creek has ﬁve native ﬁsh species, most of which are rarely found in nearby streams. Fish surveys conducted by our research team before (2004) and after (2006) restoration, in nearby streams, yielded only a few individuals of one native species, Pantosteous clarki (desert sucker) with more than 98% non-native ﬁsh. Sample sizes of native ﬁsh in these streams would be too low to determine how they varied during the duration of this study. Similarly, macroinvertebrate assemblages in Fossil Creek differ from
those in other nearby streams (LeRoy & Marks 2006) making it difﬁcult to compare food web structure across streams.
Pre-Restoration Threats Assessment. To estimate the relative magnitude of exotic species and ﬂow diversion, we compared ﬁsh densities and food web structure, using stable isotopes, in the control reach with the disturbed reaches. Although this correlative design is not conducive to replication, it provides the best estimate available of the magnitude of threats in this system. We predicted that native ﬁsh densities would be reduced by both ﬂow diversion and exotic species and that exotic species would alter native ﬁsh diets.
RestorationInterventionsandCosts. Fifteen kilometers of stream was treated with antimycin A, to remove exotic ﬁsh, in fall 2004, 6 months before ﬂow was restored (Weedman et al. 2005). Approximately 1,900 native ﬁsh were salvaged before chemical treatment, transferred by helicopter to a holding facility near the Irving Power Plant, and released back into the river following chemical treatment (Table 1). The number of ﬁsh captured is presented in Table 1. Because there were a few mortalities, the number of ﬁsh re-introduced was slightly lower than the number captured. Mortality was estimated at lower than 10% for all species (Weedman et al. 2005). A ﬁsh Aabarrierwas built near river km 16 topreventexoticﬁsh from re-entering the stream, leaving the top 16 km of stream free of exotic ﬁsh and the bottom 7 km with exotic ﬁsh (Fig. 1). The barrier was designed and built by the Bureau of Reclamation as a drop barrier with roughly a 2-m drop that spans the entire channel (http://www.usbr.gov/lc/phoenix/biology/azﬁsh/ dropbarriers.html). Neither native nor exotic ﬁsh are able to cross the barrier when swimming upstream. The barrier was placed at this site because it was the most downstream site with a sufﬁciently constricted channel to build this type of barrier. The barrier was designed to have minimal effects on ﬂow and appears much like a natural waterfall. The effects of chemical treatment on invertebrates were minimal and are reported in Dinger and Marks (2007). Flow was restored in June 2005 by re-diverting water around the dam. The ﬂumes have been deconstructed and ﬂow was increased from between 5.6 Ls−1 and 62.2 Ls−1 before restoration to 1,218 Ls−1 after restoration. Fossil Creek dam was operated as a run of the river dam with a diversion, so ﬂow restoration here refers to return of base ﬂow. Deconstruction of the hydropower plants and diversion dam is expected to be completed in 2010. The dam is being removed for safety and liability issues. With the dam still in place, it is possible to document the effects of increased ﬂow decoupled from effects of dam removal, such as increased sediments or changes in water quality. The hydropower decommissioning will cost approximately $12.3 million (N. Svor, 2007, Arizona Public Service, Phoenix, AZ, personal communication). Although the restoration goals of decommissioning the facility were broad based and included improving stream and riparian habitat for multiple species, improving conditions for native ﬁsh was a major impetus behindthe decision to decommissionthe facility (Marks 2007). The removal of exotic ﬁsh added $1.1 million
to the cost and was a targeted intervention for reviving native ﬁsh (R. Clarkson 2007, United State Bureau of Reclamation, Phoenix, AZ, personal communication).
Fish Sampling. We estimated ﬁsh densities using snorkel surveys. Surveys were conducted twice prior to restoration (summer 2003, spring 2004) and four times after restoration (fall 2005, spring 2006, fall 2006, spring 2007). Twentythree sites were sampled, although each site was not sampled each period (Fig. 1). Sites were chosen to provide coverage along the entire length of stream. Sites were 90- to 335-m long and contained both pool and rifﬂe habitats. To minimize observer bias, surveys consisted of three snorkel passes through the entire length of the reach by independent observers. Individuals were trained to swim upstream slowly but continuously at similar rates. Fish samples were standardized to reach length. Individual ﬁsh were identiﬁed to species and categorized by length into three length categories (<100 mm, 100–200 mm, and >200 mm). Because the two chub species (Gila robusta and G. nigra) are morphologically similar, no attempt was made to distinguish between these two species during snorkel surveys and they were all counted as chub. Likewise, no attempt was made to distinguish between speckled dace (Rhinichthys osculus) and longﬁn dace (Agosia chrysogaster). Fish trapping and salvage data showed that longﬁn dace were extremely rare, suggesting that the majority of dace observed were speckled dace (Table 1, Marks et al. 2005). The data used for each site are the means of the three independent snorkel passes for each survey period. We used snorkel surveys rather than capturing ﬁsh because snorkeling is non-invasive, causing no incidental mortalities, and because managers speciﬁcally requested that researchers minimize handling of ﬁsh for the ﬁrst few years following recovery efforts. Prior to restoration, we conducted more invasive sampling by capturing ﬁsh with hoop nets, minnow traps, and electroshocking to test the efﬁcacy of snorkel surveys. We and others found that snorkel surveys in Fossil Creek, where water clarity is
very high, yield similar relative abundance patterns to other methods (Marks et al. 2005; Marsh et al. 2006). Sampling was consistent across times and sites, and should represent an unbiased estimate of the relative differences in ﬁsh populations before and after restoration. Sample sites were not equally distributed across treatments due to different sized treatment reaches (1–15 km) and because monitoring began before managers decided in which areas of the stream to remove exotic ﬁsh. Speciﬁcally, there are a disproportionate number of sites where exotic ﬁsh were removed because the ﬁsh barrier was built further downstream than was suggested in the initial management plans. Fish densities among treatment reaches prior to restoration were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA where sites within treatment reaches were used as replicates. This pseudoreplicated design described whether treatment reaches differed prior to restoration, but did not allow for statistical inference to test whether reaches differed due to their environmental condition (ﬂow diversion, presence of exotics). Nevertheless, this analysis provided a rational basis for evaluating threats and predicting responses to restoration. Fish responses to restoration were analyzed using a BACI ANOVA as described earlier. Here, sites were nested or averaged within treatments for each samplingperiod. Samplestaken atdifferentdates were treated as replicates in a two-way ANOVA with restoration treatment and time as main effects. The independent variable, restoration treatment, had four treatment categories (above dam control, water restored no exotic ﬁsh, water restored exotic ﬁsh removed, water restored exotic ﬁsh remain). The independent variable time had two categories (before and after restoration). A signiﬁcant interaction term (treatment × time) indicated that the relative differences among treatments changed following restoration. Because this modiﬁed BACI design has multiple impact treatments, the following two post hoc hypotheses were tested to evaluate how treatment reaches differed post-restoration: (1) native ﬁsh populations at the control site would not change signiﬁcantly following restoration but would increase in the restored sites; and (2) increases in native ﬁsh populations would be signiﬁcantly higher where exotic ﬁsh were removed than where they remain.
Stable Isotope Collections. Fish ﬁn clips and whole invertebrates were collected for isotope analysis from three treatments: full ﬂows with non-natives absent, dewatered ﬂows with non-natives absent, and partially dewatered ﬂows with non-natives present. Fin clips were used to avoid sacriﬁcing individuals of listed ﬁsh species. Samples were collected in August 2002. The third reach was re-sampled in November 2003 because there were inadequate replicates of smallmouth bass captured during the ﬁrst sampling. All ﬁsh and invertebrates were re-sampled in November 2003 and used in mixing models. Invertebrate samples were identiﬁed and categorized into functional feeding groups using Merritt and Cummins (1996). Samples were oven-dried at 60◦C and sub-samples were weighed into 4×6 mm tin boats. Samples weighed approximately 0.4 mg. Samples were analyzed for δ13C, δ15N,
%C and %N using a CE Elantech elemental analyzer (NC 2100) coupled to a ThermoFinnigan DeltaPLUS-XL isotoperatio mass spectrometer. Samples were run against internal laboratory and NIST standard materials. For both δ13C and δ15N, the standard error from ﬁve repeated analyses of the same standard reference material was always less than 0.2 per mil. Stable Isotope data were analyzed using the dual isotope, multi-source mixing models in the ISOSOURCE computer program (Phillips & Gregg 2001, 2003). Mixing models assumed a 3.4‰ enrichment of 15N for each trophic level (Minagawa & Wada 1984). Mixing models generate diet estimates by calculating mean and conﬁdence intervals for different diet items. Mixing models provide quantitative estimates of the likelihood that a given food is part of a consumer’s diet as long as the isotopic signals of food sources and consumers are measured.


xresults
Pre-Restoration Prior to ﬂow restorationand exotic ﬁsh extirpation, the patterns of ﬁsh distribution and the stable isotope structure of the food web both suggested that native ﬁsh were more strongly reduced by the presence of exotic ﬁsh than by reduced ﬂow. Native ﬁsh densities were more than 20-fold lower in treatments with non-native ﬁsh than treatments without them (F=14.6, p<0.0001), but did not differ signiﬁcantly between full ﬂow and dewatered treatments that contained only native ﬁsh (Fig. 2A). Native ﬁsh densities were more than two times higher in the control reach than the dewatered area, but this difference was not signiﬁcant (p>0.05). Native ﬁsh densities were 40-fold lower in the reach with both reduced ﬂow and exotic ﬁsh relative to the control site (Fig. 2A). Native ﬁsh species were distributed differently across treatments (Fig. 2B). Chub was the only species that appeared to be sensitive to reduced ﬂow, whereas both dace and chub declined signiﬁcantly in the presence of exotic ﬁsh (Figs. 2B & 3A). In contrast, neither desert nor Sonoran suckers were negatively affected by exotics (Fig. 3B). Stable isotope analysis of food web structure suggested that non-natives had a greater effect on the feeding ecology of native ﬁsh than ﬂow diversion (Fig. 4). At the reference reach with full ﬂows and no non-natives, native ﬁsh were at the top of the food chain, feeding mainly on aquatic invertebrates (Fig. 4). In the reference reach, the δ15N values of native ﬁsh, were 3.9‰ higher than the average value for aquatic invertebrates, indicating that native ﬁsh under pristine conditions are a full trophic level above invertebrates (Peterson et al. 1986; Peterson & Fry 1987). Downstream, in the reach with exotic ﬁsh, the mean δ15N difference between native ﬁsh and aquatic invertebrates was only 2.2‰, indicating that exotic ﬁsh had reduced the trophic position of natives. In this same downstream reach, exotic smallmouth bass and green sunﬁsh appeared to displace native ﬁsh as top predators, having δ15N values indicating a full trophic position (3.5‰) between these exotic ﬁsh and their aquatic insect prey (Fig. 4). It is possible
that exotic ﬁsh also feed on juvenile native ﬁsh. The similarity in δ15N values of native ﬁsh between the reach with reduced ﬂow and the control reach, both without exotic ﬁsh, suggests little effect of ﬂow diversion on the trophic position of native ﬁsh. Multiple source mixing models using stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen revealed that reduced ﬂow alone was associated with no major changes in the relative proportions of invertebrate guilds in the diets of native ﬁsh (Table 2). In contrast, the diets of native chub, the dominant native ﬁsh, changed signiﬁcantly in the presence of exotic ﬁsh (Table 2). In the absence of non-natives, chub diet included large bodied
invertebrate predators (44% relative abundance) and shredders (44% relative abundance) but was dominated by small ﬁlter feeders (82%) where exotic ﬁsh were present (Table 2). As with ﬁsh densities, observed differences in stable isotope values between treatment reaches could be due to other aspects of intersite variation rather than to exotic ﬁsh. The treatment with exotic ﬁsh is further downstream than the other treatments and has minor differences in physical and chemical variables (Marks et al. 2006; Carter & Marks 2007). Nevertheless, this analysis can be used as observational evidence for evaluating threats and generating hypothesis about how ﬁsh densities and diets will change with restoration. Although stable isotope
data do not directly verify ﬁsh diets, they provide indirect evidence of differences in diets and are particularly useful when researchers and managers do not want to conduct invasive gut analysis studies on threatened species. The shifts in δ13C values of native ﬁsh concurrent with water diversion suggested that ﬁsh living in the pristine reach above the dam relied more on algal productivity whereas ﬁsh living in the disturbed reach was dominated by leaf litter inputs. Carbon isotopes, however, are of limited utility for distinguishing between algae and leaf litter because their isotopic values are too similar. Stable isotopes of hydrogen should help resolve this problem (Doucett et al. 2007). Based on this threats analysis, we predicted that native ﬁsh densities would increase only slightly with ﬂow restoration alone but would increase up to 40-fold where exotic ﬁsh were removed. We predicted that dace and chub, whose densities were depressed and diets altered in the presence of exotic ﬁsh, would show larger increases to exotic ﬁsh removal than either desert or Sonoran suckers.
Response to Restoration Both ﬂow restoration and exotic ﬁsh removal increased native ﬁsh populations; however, the response to ﬂow required
the absence of exotic ﬁsh (Fig. 2A; Table 3). All terms in the BACI ANOVA were strongly signiﬁcant; the signiﬁcant interaction term indicated that treatments responded differently to restoration (Table 3). Native ﬁsh increased 3-fold where ﬂow was restored in the absence of exotic ﬁsh but showed no response where exotic ﬁsh remained (Fig. 2A). As predicted, recovery was most pronounced where ﬂow was restored and exotic ﬁsh were removed, with an almost 50-fold increase in native ﬁsh (Fig. 2A). Fish densities were higher at the restored sites than in the reference reach due to high densities of small, young ﬁsh at restored sites. In addition, some of the sites where exotic ﬁsh were removed had travertine terraces and pools, ideal habitat for native ﬁsh (Marks et al. 2006). We expect that the observed relative differences between the control and the restored sites will decline as ﬁsh in restored areas reach a stable age distribution. Native ﬁsh did not increase below the ﬁsh barrier where exotic ﬁsh remain (Fig. 2A). Below the ﬁsh barrier, the ﬁsh community comprises mostly exotic ﬁsh (Fig. 2B). A BACI ANOVA comparing ﬁsh responses in only the control treatment and where exotic ﬁsh remain indicated no signiﬁcant response of native ﬁsh to restoration within either of these two treatments. As predicted, dace and chub showed the strongest responses to restoration (Fig. 5). To compare differences in responses of
native species to exotic ﬁsh removal, we compared densities of ﬁsh before and after restoration within the treatment reach where exotic ﬁsh were removed at sites where each native species overlapped with bass or sunﬁsh before restoration. For example, dace, which were only present in the 5 km below the dam prior to restoration, increased 150-fold at these sites and have not yet dispersed downstream. It is not clear what is limiting their dispersal. Chub cosed with exotic ﬁsh throughout the reach and increased 70-fold (Fig. 5). The two suckers also increased signiﬁcantly, but their responses were less dramatic (Fig. 5). Desert suckers increased 52-fold and Sonoran suckers, which were only found below the Irving Power plant before restoration, increased 17-fold at these sites (Fig. 5). Despite this modest increase, Sonoran suckers are dispersing upstream and are now found at sites where they were not observed prior to restoration. More dace were repatriatedthan theother species (Table 1), whichmay account in part for their large populations after restoration. Although dace showed the largest proportional increase where they were repatriated, chub now dominate the native assemblage (Fig. 2B). Dace remained concentrated above the Irving Power Plant with only a few individuals observed downstream. In contrast, chub and suckers were repatriated below the Irving Power Plant (Fig. 1), and have been observed throughout the river.
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis The exotic ﬁsh removal added signiﬁcant value to the restoration effort because exotic ﬁsh posed a bigger threat than reduced ﬂow and cost considerably less to remove than decommissioning the hydropower facility. We estimated that in the last 2 years, restoration actions led to a total increase of approximately 49,710 native ﬁsh. We assumed that ﬂow restoration alone in the presence of exotic ﬁsh caused no change in native ﬁsh. We further assumed that observed changes in ﬁsh density in the treatment reaches were dominated by effectsof restorationtreatmentsand far less by natural variation. The ﬁrst assumption is supported by the lack of response of native ﬁsh below the ﬁsh barrier where exotic ﬁsh remain, and the second by the low level of interannual variation observed at the reference site. Although there was no treatment where exotics were removed and ﬂow remained diverted, it is possible to estimate what the effects of exotic ﬁsh removal might have been given the pre-restoration survey data and the assumption that the effects of ﬂow restoration and exotic removal are additive. We attribute recovery of 1,022 native ﬁsh to the effects of ﬂow restoration,and the recoveryof 48,697 ﬁsh to the effects of removing exotics. Flow restoration alone yielded 0.08 ﬁsh per $1,000; with exotic ﬁsh removal, the yield increased to 3.6 ﬁsh per $1,000. Thus, the 10% increase in cost of the exotic ﬁsh removal increased native ﬁsh recovery substantially. Although our analysis indicates greater beneﬁt to native ﬁsh from removing exotics, ﬂow restoration will almost certainly promote ecosystem recovery in other ways, such as extensive recovery of Fossil Creek’s namesake
geomorphic feature, travertine dams and pools (Malusa et al. 2003; Marks et al. 2006; Marks 2007).

xdiscussion
Discussion This study shows that although both ﬂow restoration and exotic ﬁsh removal increased native ﬁsh, the effect of exotic ﬁsh removal far outweighed the effect of ﬂow restoration. Flow restoration likely facilitated the dramatic response of native ﬁsh to the removal of exotic ﬁsh by increasing carrying capacity and spawning rates of the small existing populations of native ﬁsh. Although there have been hundreds of articles implicating exotic ﬁsh in the demise of native ﬁsh, there are few studies documenting how natives respond to exotic removal (Lintermans 2000; Maezona & Miyashito 2004; Lepak et al. 2006; Bunnell et al. 2006) and no studies comparing the efﬁcacy of ﬂow restoration and exotic removal. In Fossil Creek, if exotic ﬁsh had not been removed, ﬂow restoration may have facilitated upstream migration of exotic bass and sunﬁsh, ultimately causing native ﬁsh to decline. This study indicated that in the southwestern United States, and other regions where exotic ﬁsh have largely displaced natives, habitat restoration alone may do little to promote recovery of native ﬁsh and could unintentionally harm natives where disturbances prevent dispersal of exotics or favor natives over exotics. For example, in the Great Lakes region, artiﬁcial barriers such as dams can limit dispersal of exotic lampreys so here removing barriers could harm native ﬁsh (Harford & McLaughlin 2007). Similarly, in New Zealand streams that have been invaded by brown trout, native species ﬁnd refuge in highly disturbed reaches where ﬂow has been diverted (Leprieur et al. 2006). In an Australian stream, however, removal of exotic rainbow trout resulted in the recovery of the native ﬁsh (Galaxis olidus) without other habitat alterations (Lintermans 2000). The pre-restoration threats analysis yielded surprisingly accurate predictions about ﬁsh recovery, illustrating how correlative studies can be powerful tools for generating hypotheses in an adaptive management cycle despite problems with pseudo-replication and statistical inference. Not only did the threats analysis predict that recovery would be most pronounced where exotics were removed, but it also predicted which species would respond the strongest. In contrast to our ﬁndings, other studies implicate ﬂow as the major factor causing the demise of native ﬁsh populations (Marchetti & Moyle 2001; Sada & Vinyard 2002). In Fossil Creek, all native ﬁsh species were able to persist under reduced ﬂow, although their densities were reduced by 30%. The stable isotope results suggested that exotic ﬁsh had displaced natives as top predators. Because the stable isotope study was not replicated at the treatment level (replicate samples were taken within treatment sites), it is possible that the lower δ15N values of native ﬁsh were not caused by exotic ﬁsh but are due to different food availability at the site where natives and exotics coexisted. Research in progress by our team will test how ﬁsh isotope values change with restoration. If δ15N values of native ﬁsh
increase where exotic ﬁsh were removed, this would support the hypothesis that exotic ﬁsh caused natives to feed lower on the food chain. Shifts in the trophic position of exotic ﬁsh in the presence of natives have been detected using stable isotopes in other ecosystems (e.g, Vander Zanden et al. 1999), suggesting a general mechanism of exotic ﬁsh forcing native ﬁsh to eat lower quality food resources. Rapid shifts in diet in response to the removal of exotic bass were observed, using stable isotopes, in native lake trout indicating rapid recovery of food web linkages following the extirpation of exotics (Lepak et al. 2006). Many stream restoration projects are poorly monitored, making it difﬁcult to learn from prior actions. Although projects on federal lands, such as this one, require environmental assessments under the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA), monitoring is rarely conducted when the intent of the project is to improve conditions for listed species. Neither of the two initial environmental impact assessments (for dam decommissioning and exotic removal) recommended monitoring native ﬁsh and invertebrates even though enhancement of native ﬁsh and their habitat was a primary goal for both projects. Monitoring programs are usually only required where management actions are expected to have negative effects on listed species. Despite the positive intent of restoration projects for native species, it is possible that interventions reverse one disturbance but create or exacerbate others pointing to the need for viewing interventions from an ecosystem perspective (Zavaleta et al. 2001). For example, studies from other dam decommissioning projects showed that sediments released from behind the dam can reduce densities of native ﬁlter feeders such as mussels (Sethi et al. 2004), and drained reservoirs can be vulnerable to the invasion of exotic plants (Stanley & Doyle 2003; Orr & Stanley 2006). Removal of exotic ﬁsh can facilitate invasions of other exotic species such as crayﬁsh, which increased in ponds when exotic bass and bluegill were removed (Maezona & Miyashita 2004). In Fossil Creek, exotic crayﬁsh are increasing more rapidly in areas where exotic bass were removed relative to sites where they remain (Adams 2006). Crayﬁsh, however, do not appear to be affecting recruitment of native ﬁsh based on results presented herein. Chemical treatment to remove exotic ﬁsh can kill non-target vertebrates and invertebrates. In Fossil Creek, antimycin A increased macroinvertebrate mortality and decreased macroinvertebrate densities, but these effects were relatively short lived. Within 6 months after treatment, invertebrate densities rebounded to pre-treatment levels at most sites and did not appear to limit ﬁsh recovery (Dinger & Marks 2007). This analysis shows how additional investments to large restoration projects can insure that speciﬁc objectives are met. Many restoration programs will beneﬁt from this approach because most ecosystems face multiple threats where minimal additional investments could yield large ecological beneﬁts. Although habitat improvements can enhance many other attributes of ecosystem health, such as improving water quality, increasing habitat for plants and animals and improving the aesthetic and recreation value of a stream, exotic ﬁsh
removal programs may need to accompany projects where native ﬁsh recovery is a major goal and exotic ﬁsh are prevalent.

