xabstract
Non-native species represent a significant threat to indigenous biodiversity and ecosystem functioning worldwide.
It is widely acknowledged that invasive crayfish species may be instrumental in modifying benthic invertebrate
community structure, but there is limited knowledge regarding the temporal and spatial extent of these
effectswithin lotic ecosystems. This study investigates the long termchanges to benthicmacroinvertebrate community
composition following the invasion of signal crayfish, Pacifastacus leniusculus, into English rivers. Data
from long-term monitoring sites on 7 rivers invaded by crayfish and 7 rivers where signal crayfish were absent
throughout the record (control sites)were used to examine howinvertebrate community composition and populations
of individual taxa changed as a result of invasion. Following the detection of non-native crayfish, significant
shifts in invertebrate community composition were observed at invaded sites compared to control sites.
This pattern was strongest during autumn months but was also evident during spring surveys. The observed
shifts in community composition following invasion were associated with reductions in the occurrence of ubiquitous
Hirudinea species (Glossiphonia complanata and Erpobdella octoculata), Gastropoda (Radix spp.), Ephemeroptera
(Caenis spp.), and Trichoptera (Hydropsyche spp.); although variations in specific taxa affected were
evident between regions and seasons. Changes in community structure were persistent over time with no evidence
of recovery, suggesting that crayfish invasions represent significant perturbations leading to permanent
changes in benthic communities. The results provide fundamental knowledge regarding non-native crayfish invasions
of lotic ecosystems required for the development of future management strategies.

xintroduction
The spread of non-native taxa represents a significant threat to freshwater
biodiversity and ecosystemfunctioning at a global scale (Sala et al.,
2000; Lodge et al., 2000; Simberloff et al., 2013). The establishment of
populations of invasive species within an ecosystem can severely disrupt
the structure and functioning of native floral and faunal communities
through direct predation, competition and displacement of native species,
but also via indirect pathways and the decoupling of trophic dynamics
(Nyström et al., 1996; Strayer, 2010; Gutiérrez et al., 2014). Consequently,
the influence of invasive taxa are often far reaching,with impacts ranging
fromthe replacement of individual species to the modification of ecosystem
processes (Ricciardi, 2007; Jackson et al., 2014).
Crayfish represent some of themost successful andwidely distributed
invasive aquatic species worldwide, following either intentional introduction
or accidental translocation (e.g. Hudina et al., 2012;
Holdich et al., 2014; Kouba et al., 2014). They are one of the largest
freshwater invertebrates, frequently dominating benthic faunal biomass
where they occur (Lodge and Hill, 1994; Momot, 1995; Sousa
et al., 2013). Even though many non-native crayfish replace an indigenous
species, and thus frequently occupy similar ecological niches, invader
effects may still be extensive if individuals reach a larger size
and/or occur at greater population densities (Strayer, 2010; Gheradi
et al., 2011), especially if this is associatedwith reduced predation pressure
or if invaders are able to exploit a wider range of resources.
Crayfish display opportunistic polytrophic feeding habits, consuming
algae, macrophytes, detritus, zoobenthos, fish and other crayfish
(Momot et al., 1978; Lagrue et al., 2014; Ercoli et al., 2015a). Invasive
crayfish may also act as ecosystem engineers through the alteration of
detrital processing rates (Creed and Reed, 2004; Bobeldyk and
Lamberti, 2008; Carvalho et al., 2016) and by changing the dominant
algal cover on substrates (Creed, 1994; Matsuzaki et al., 2009). Studies
documenting the effect of invasive crayfish in stream ecosystems have
identified significant reductionson the biomass and richness of aquatic
macrophytes (Lodge et al., 1994; Nyström et al., 2001), and aquatic invertebrates
(Nyström et al., 1999; Stenroth and Nyström, 2003;
Crawford et al., 2006; Nilsson et al., 2012; Ercoli et al., 2015b).
Following invasion by crayfish, aquatic invertebrate community
composition has been reported to shift towards more mobile taxa
adapted to high flow velocities (e.g. Ephemeroptera species) at the expense
of less mobile taxa such as Mollusca, Hirudinea and casebearing
Trichoptera species (Keller and Ruman, 1998; Parkyn et al.,
1997; Dorn, 2013). The mobility of taxa, in addition to prey handling
time, has been cited as key characteristics influencing the vulnerability
of individual species associated with preferential predation (Ilheu and
Bernardo, 1993; Nyström and Perez, 1998; Nyström, 1999). However,
many taxa display behavioural and life history changes in response to
predator pressure through avoidance behaviours such as vertical migration
or enhanced locomotion (Crowl and Covich, 1990; Alexander and
Covich, 1991; Haddaway et al., 2014).
Indirect effects may also be evident within the ecosystem with a removal
ofmacrophyte and algae cover affecting invertebrate populations
through the loss of trophic resources and habitat availability (Lodge
et al., 1994;Nyströmet al., 1996). Similarly, a reduction of sedentary periphyton
grazers (such as gastropods) and stimulated productivity
through the excretion of nutrients may potentially benefit mobile
grazers through the liberation of resources (Flint and Goldman, 1975;
Charlebois and Lamberti, 1996). There have been suggestions that the
composition of diet and feeding behaviour of crayfish varieswith season
(Goddard, 1988; Guan and Wiles, 1998), although evidence remains
limited. Crayfish activity is seasonally variable being strongly regulated
by water temperature (Gheradi et al., 1998; Bubb et al., 2004) as is the
availability of macroinvertebrate prey (Allan, 1981).
As invasive crayfish extend their range, understanding their effects on
biodiversity and ecosystem services is increasingly important for
informing management strategies (Lodge et al., 2012; Jackson et al.,
2014; Moorhouse et al., 2014). Despite the widely acknowledged threat
that invasive crayfish pose,much of the research to date has been focused
on lentic ecosystems, whilst the impact on stream communities has been
poorly quantified in many regions (Stenroth and Nyström, 2003; Pysek
et al., 2008; Lodge et al., 2012). The majority of studies have investigated
the short-termeffects of invasive crayfish at site or reach scales via smallscale
in-situ enclosure experiments or through the use of ex-situ laboratorymesocosms
typically over one season (e.g., Parkyn et al., 1997; Stenroth
and Nyström, 2003; Magoulick, 2014; see Twardocleb et al., 2013 for a
meta-summary of all published invasive crayfish studies). Other studies
have employed in-situ sampling over a limited duration (1–12 months)
where invading crayfish populations are already well established
(e.g., Crawford et al., 2006). Short term experiments providemechanistic
insights into crayfish–community or individual population interactions.
However, it is also necessary to investigate the long-term and large
scale effects of invasive crayfish in order to determine whether they are
persistent and if the effects vary spatially, temporally or seasonally.
Long- term studies also provide the opportunity to quantify the extent
of invasion effects that cannot be captured though experimental
mesocosm studies (Wilson et al., 2004; McCarthy et al., 2006).
This study examines the long-term effects of the invasive signal crayfish,
Pacifastacus leniusculus (Dana) on macroinvertebrate community
composition and individual taxa within lowland rivers in England (UK)
during spring and autumn seasons. Signal crayfish (P. leniusculus) are endemic
to North America and have been introduced to over 20 countries in
Europe. They are considered to be one of the most prevalent non-native
crayfish species in Europe, with widespread and abundant populations
now established across the UK (Kouba et al., 2014; Holdich et al., 2014).
Unlike previous studies, the effect of invasive crayfish is investigated
using multiple regions and catchments before and after invasion, and in
direct comparison with control sites where long-term monitoring has
not recorded the presence of P. leniusculus. Specifically we addressed
the following questions:
1) Does the invasion of P. leniusculus lead to significant changes in benthic
macroinvertebrate community composition in lotic ecosystems?
2) Is the effect of P. leniusculus invasion on macroinvertebrate community
composition spatially extensive (is the effect evident over different
bio-geographical ranges of lowland England) and do the effects
persist over time (multiple years)?
3) Are the implications of P. leniusculus invasion seasonally dependent
or are the effects on themacroinvertebrate community composition
persistent and evident all year round?
4) Are the same lotic taxa identified in previous studies of invasion by
P. leniusculus (e.g. sensu Guan and Wiles, 1998; Usio and
Townsend, 2004; Crawford et al., 2006) responsible for the changes
observed in rivers in the current investigation?

xmethods
2.1. Datasets characterised
Following preliminary consultation with staff from a statutory environmental
monitoring authority, the Environment Agency of England,
macroinvertebrate community data from three English regions were
extracted from the Environment Agency ‘BIOSYS’ database. The
database covers sites across England and contains long term biomonitoring
(benthic macroinvertebrate) records for over 27,000 sites. To
allow comparison between sites invaded by P. leniusculus and control
sites, those selected for the study shared similar characteristics with
the exception of invasion by crayfish. This aimed to minimise the influence
of any potential confounding factors on the analysis. All sites selected
had to fulfil the following criteria: i) records extended over
multiple years with a minimum of 5-years macroinvertebrate community
data prior to invasion by P. leniusculus or in the case of control
sites 5-years before the average date rivers in the region were invaded
(the dataset was subsequently divided into spring and autumn survey
periods); ii) sites did not support a native crayfish population during
any of the time series; iii) sites were not subject to other recent invasions
and; iv) sites were not subject to other significant anthropogenic
stressors such as water abstraction, flow regulation or impaired water
quality. Criterion iii) was relaxed for the non-native gastropod
Potamopyrgus antipodarum (Gastropoda: Hydrobiidae) because this
species is widely distributed across most regions of the UK since its introduction
over a century ago (Ponder, 1988) but is not thought to
have a significant influence on freshwater invertebrate communities
in most European streams (Murria et al., 2008).
Data from three regions formed the basis for the analysis, encompassing
natural variability in community composition across England
(East, South -East and North-West England; Fig. 1). The regions were selected
to reflect natural biogeographical, geological and hydrological variability
across England, thus incorporating the diverse regional variability
of lowland river systems. Following screening of the data, a total of 7 ‘invaded’
and 7 ‘control’ lowland rivers were identified (Table 1). Rivers
were selected to have broadly comparable physical characteristics within
the individual regions (channel size, discharge, water chemistry, altitude
and geology). Rivers in South East England were predominately characterised
by chalk deposits, those in East England by mudstones and those
in the North-West by sedimentary sandstone and igneous rocks. The
characteristics of the rivers employed by region are shown in Table 2. Rivers
utilised in the study were not heavily managed or regulated and consequently
physical and hydrological characteristics did not change during
the study period. In addition, electrofishing surveys conducted by the Environment
Agency of England indicate no major changes in fish populations
over time in all rivers employed.
All benthic invertebrate samples were collected using the Environment
Agency's standard sampling protocol comprising a 3-minute
‘kick-sample’, which encompasses all available habitats, and an additional
1-minute, detailed hand search (Murray-Bligh, 1999). This sampling
strategy has provided an effective means of detecting temporal
changes in invertebrate communities of English andWelsh rivers previously
(Monk et al., 2008; Durance and Ormerod, 2009). Data were
analysed on a seasonal basis (Spring,March–May and Autumn, September–
November) to enable the determination of consistent trends. The
data-set comprised 530 samples in total (255 and 275 from invaded
and control samples respectively) with the majority of samples collected
between 1990 and 2013 (three sites had data series extending back
to the 1970's and an additional three further sites had data from the
mid 1980's) and a total of 596 taxa were recorded.
Given the length of macroinvertebrate community records many of
the faunal lists comprised mixed taxonomic levels of identification. As a
result the lowest possible taxonomic level available across the three regions
was used. In the majority of instances this meant genus level data
were utilised, although species level data were available for a number of
taxa. Diptera larvae were resolved to family level and Hydracarina to
order level throughout the series. Due to variations in the way in which
abundance data were recorded over time, reflecting a shift from abundance
classes on a 33rd percentile logarithmic scale to abundances on
standard logarithmic scales (and real counts for single digit abundances),
abundance data were standardised into ordinal classes (Durance and
Ormerod, 2009) to enable comparison over the whole series (1 = ≤9,
2=10–32, 3 =33–99, 4 =100–332, 5 = 333–999, 6 =≥1000).
2.2. Data analysis
Changes to macroinvertebrate community composition were examined
via non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) using
Bray—Curtis similarity coefficients. Data were categorised into four
groups: i) control — before invasion, ii) control — after invasion, iii) invaded
— before invasion and; iv) invaded — after invasion. For invaded
sites the approximate date of invasion was determined by the first occurrence
of P. leniusculus in the historical faunal series. No density
data were available for the sites because routine sampling of crayfish
populations is not a standard Environment Agency biomonitoring practice
following invasion. Detecting signal crayfish is difficult due to their
high mobility (Gladman et al., 2010) and there are currently no
methods of determining crayfish populations below a density of
0.2 m−2 (Peay, 2003). For the kick-net samples utilised in this study,
it is likely that the detection limit is higher, probably approaching a density
of 1.0 m−2. Consequently for all sites employed in this study, crayfish
densitieswould be significant, although some variation by sites and
through time is likely. In addition, it is important to acknowledge that
signal crayfish may have been present at the study sites for a several
years prior to formal detection.
Control sites were divided into two periods (before invasion and
after invasion) based on themean date of invasion for the invaded rivers
in the respective region (1997 for East; 1997 for North West; and 2003
for South East). The assignment of a nominal date allowed a direct comparison
between the control and invaded sites over the same timeperiod
and also provided a means of assessingwhether therewere temporal
shifts in invertebrate community composition not associatedwith
crayfish invasion. This approach was taken as previous long-term analyses
of UK data sets have revealed changes in community composition
associated with drought (Monk et al., 2008), modification of channel
morphology (Dunbar et al., 2010) and improvements in water quality
(Durance and Ormerod, 2009).
A one way ANOSIM (analysis of similarities) was used to examine
differences in the communities amongst the control and invaded rivers
before and after ‘invasion’. BothP and R ANOSIM valueswere examined,
with R values N 0.75 indicating strong separation amongst groups, R =
0.75–0.25 indicating separate groups with overlapping values and
R b 0.25 as barely distinguishable groups (Clarke and Gorley, 2006).
Taxa contributing to the differentiation of communities within individual
regions and for river group (control and invaded) were identified
through the application of the similarity percentage (SIMPER)with a selection
of these examined in further analysis according to criteria described
below. Preliminary NMDS analysis indicated strong differences
amongst regions for macroinvertebrate community composition and
as a result subsequent analyses were conducted on a regional basis.
ANOSIM indicated significant differences for all pairwise comparisons
of regions in both seasons; all P values b 0.001 and R values N 0.75. To
assess temporal changes in community composition and determine if
macroinvertebrate communities demonstrated recovery following invasion,
temporal trajectories of changes in assemblage composition
were plotted for each river and season. All regional NMDS analyses
were performed in PRIMER Version 6.1.16 (PRIMER-E Ltd., Plymouth,
UK).
To assess changes in individual taxa associated with crayfish invasion,
taxon occurrence (presence or absence) amongst the control and
invaded rivers both before and after invasion were examined. Nine
taxa (3 Mollusca, 2 Ephemeroptera, 2 Hirudinea, 1 Trichoptera and 1
Crustacean)were selected for further analysis on the basis of the following
criteria: i) identified as driving community differentiation in a number
of regions through application of SIMPER in analyses outlined above
and/or ii) widely cited in previous studies of invasive crayfish effects in
lotic systems (e.g. Keller and Ruman, 1998; Haddaway et al., 2014;
Moorhouse et al., 2014) and; iii) abundant in all regions and sites during
the study period.
Generalised linearmixedmodels (GLMMs)were fitted to each taxon
for each season (Spring and Autumn) using a binomial error distribution.
Models were fitted to presence/absence data using the
glmmADMB version 0.8.1 package (Fournier et al., 2012; Skaug et al.,
2014) in R version 3.1.2 (R development Core Team, 2014). The final
model was built using region, treatment (control or invaded) and time
period (before or after invasion) as terms.Monitoring sitewas specified
as a randomeffect to reflect that taxon occurrence through time at individual
sites will be correlated. To assess the effect of crayfish on the occurrence
of specific taxa, the significance of the interaction term (time
period × treatment) was examined. This enabled determination of
whether taxa changes over time occurred in both invaded and control
rivers or if the effect was confined to those where P. leniusculus occurred.
Resultswere visualised by predicting probabilities of occurrence
for each Before–After–Control–Invaded combination calculated from
the GLMMon the linear predictor scale and transformed to the response
scale using the inverse-logit function to enable the direction and trends
of change to be ascertained. Standard errors for predictions were calculated
on the linear predictor scale by multiplying the model matrix for
each Before–After–Control–Invaded combination by the variance–covariance
matrix for the fixed-effect parameter estimates. These were
converted to confidence intervals (±2 SE) on the same scale and similarly
back-transformed. Visual predictions of the Before–After–Control–
Invaded relationship are based upon an ‘average’ site as a function of the
global GLMM.

xresults
3.1. Community composition
Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination diagrams
for all three regions (South East, NorthWest and East England) indicated
distinct clusters of macroinvertebrate communities following crayfish
invasion for both Spring and Autumn seasons (Fig. 2). In most
instances, each of the regional diagrams indicated similar community
composition between control and invaded sites prior to crayfish colonisation.
Following colonisation, the invaded and control sites formed distinct
groups, indicating a change in community composition at both
control and invaded sites compared to the period preceding crayfish
invasion.
The degree of separation between the groups using analysis of similarity
(ANOSIM) indicated highly significant differences for all pairwise
comparisons of groups for South East England (all P b 0.02), NorthWest
(all P b 0.002) and East England (all P b 0.001). R values indicate that before
colonisation, control and invaded groups were barely distinguishable
in the South East (Rs = 0.116 and Ra = 0.16 for both spring and
autumn respectively) and in the East during spring months (Rs =
0.130). During autumn months for East England (Ra = 0.280) and for
both seasons in North West England (Rs = 0.636 and Ra = 0.344) the
degree of similarity between invaded and control sites before invasion
was less strong butwas still evident. Following colonisation by crayfish,
invaded and control groups demonstrated a higher degree of separation
in all three regions and were strongly separated in the North West
(Rs=0.886 and Ra=0.861) andwere separated but overlappingwithin
the South East (Rs = 0.512 and Ra = 0.421) and East (Rs = 0.457 and
Ra=0.609).
Temporal trajectories of macroinvertebrate community change
were observed for both invaded and control rivers (Fig. 3 and
Fig. S1). Within invaded rivers, the community demonstrated clear
changes in structure directly after invasion. Community changes
were also evident in control rivers over the time period but these
were different to those recorded for invaded sites and very little
overlap was evident after the invasion point (IP on Fig. 3). Prior to
invasion, control and invaded river trajectories demonstrated considerable
overlap with pathways intersecting on a number of occasions.
Following the invasion point, trajectories of change for both
control and invaded rivers remained discrete, with no similarities
apparent or marked changes in trajectory paths (to indicate recovery)
evident for invaded sites.
The taxa primarily responsible for community composition changes
within invaded rivers (before vs after), as identified by the similarity
percentage (SIMPER), differed regionally as a function of natural biogeographic
differences in community composition, although several
taxa were common to two or more regions: 3 regions — Gammarus
pulex, Hydropsyche spp., Potamopyrgus antipodarum, Baetis spp. and
Hydracarina and; 2 regions — Sphaeriidae, Simuliidae and Elmidae
(Table 3). Where several species were identified by SIMPER from the
same genus within or between regions, these were combined to enable
analysis of the most ubiquitous taxa across regions through application
of the GLMM (e.g. Hydropsyche spp., Baetis spp., Caenis spp. and Radix
spp. contained several species identified by SIMPER). Regions also
displayed some seasonal differences in the taxa identified as driving
changes, with some taxa identified to be driving community
dissimilarity in one season but not the other (e.g. Planorbidae, Asellus
aquaticus, Heptageniidae). Taxa identified to be driving changes in control
river communities over timeare presented as SupplementaryMaterial
(Table S1).
3.2. Taxon-specific responses
Results presented beloware for the GLMMmodel fitted to presence/
absence of nine select taxa by individual season based upon a global
model (all regions). Results indicate if changes in taxa occurrence over
time were common across all sites (both control and invaded rivers)
or if they were confined to invaded sites and therefore could be attributed
to crayfish invasion.
3.2.1. Spring
The prevalence of the leech Glossiphonia complanata (P=0. 024)declined
significantly following crayfish invasion whilst the occurrence of
Erpobdella octoculata did not differ significantly compared to control
sites (P = 0.161), although a reduction in its occurrence was evident
(Fig. 4). The occurrence of the bivalve family Sphaeriidae declined following
invasion but thiswas not statistically significantwhen compared
to control sites (P = 0.228). The prosobranch gastropod mollusc
P. antipodarum (P=0.320) demonstrated no significant changes in occurrence
associatedwith crayfish invasionwhilst the pulmonate gastropod
Radix spp. declined significantly (P=0.003; Fig. 4). Mayflies from
the genus Caenis displayed reduced prevalence following invasion but
this was not significant relative to control sites (P=0.165). Themayfly
Baetis spp. and amphipod G. pulex displayed no change in prevalence
(P = 0.120 and P = 0.060 respectively) following crayfish invasion
with their occurrence remaining high (Fig. 4). The occurrence of the
caddisfly nymph, Hydropsyche spp., reduced significantly (P = 0.010)
following crayfish invasion compared to control sites (Fig. 4).
3.2.2. Autumn
The occurrence of the leech species G. complanata, E. octoculata, and
the gastropod Radix spp. (all P b 0.001) declined significantly following
crayfish invasion relative to control sites (Fig. 5). Both Sphaeriidae and
P. antipodarum demonstrated no change in occurrence following
crayfish invasion (P=0. 840 and P=0.225 respectively; Fig. 5). Insect
larvaewithin the order Ephemeroptera displayed contrasting responses
following crayfish invasion. The prevalence of Baetis spp. did not differ
significantly over time at either control or invaded sites (P = 0.700)
whilst Caenis spp. were significantly less common following crayfish invasion
(P ≤ 0.001; Fig. 5). The amphipod G. pulex (P = 0.281) demonstrated
no significant changes following invasion, whilst the
Trichoptera Hydropsyche spp. declined at invaded sites (P = 0.028;
Fig. 5). All statistical significance levels and standard error values for
the Before–After–Control–Invaded interaction effect for each taxon are
shown in Table 4.


xdiscussion
4.1. Invertebrate community responses to P. leniusculus invasion
The results fromthis study provide strong evidence that invasive signal
crayfish affect invertebrate community composition in lowland rivers.
All three regions examined experienced marked changes in benthic
community composition following invasion when compared to both
pre-invasion conditions and control sites. The effect on macroinvertebrate
communities in all three regions was seasonally consistent,
being strongest during autumn months, butwere also evident in spring
months. Crayfish movement and growth is strongly driven by water
temperature, with activity typically peaking during summer months
(Sousa et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2014). Consequently, stronger effects
on macroinvertebrate communities during the autumn months were
expected, as these samples typically occur at the height or towards the
end of crayfish activity (notably directly after the breeding season).
Slight differences in the taxa driving the community changes between
seasons were also evident, suggesting that seasonal heterogeneity of
prey availability, and thus preferential predation, is a key process determining
the effects of invaders on macroinverterbrate communities (Xu
et al., 2012).
In each of the regions examined, the community composition of control
and invaded sites diverged when compared with samples from the
pre-invasion period. In addition, control sites also displayed a shift in
community composition temporally, but these changes were different
to those recorded in the invaded rivers, suggesting the presence of a
widespread stressor across all sites. During the study period, England
experienced highly variable hydro-climatological conditions with a series
of high magnitude droughts and prolonged periods of low flows
in 1989–1992, 1995–1997 and 2004–2006, with the latter years focussed
in the South East of England (Marsh et al., 2007; Hannaford
and Buys, 2012). With the exception of one site, the River Ver in South
East region, the invasion by P. leniusculus occurred during or directly
after one of these high magnitude low flow periods known to have resulted
in community changes across England (Wright et al., 2004;
Monk et al., 2008; Laize et al., 2014;Worrall et al., 2014). These periods
resulted in changes to community composition at all of the sites examined
and provides evidence to explain the long-term changes observed
at control sites in addition to those at sites invaded by P. leniusculus.
However, it is important to note that the invasion of sites in this study
is likely to predate the point in which they were recorded in biomonitoring
samples in some instances. As a result, the drought conditions
may have facilitated the expansion of non-native crayfish populations.
The interaction between flow regime/hydrological variability and invasive
taxa requires further detailed examination. Evidence suggests that
crayfish populations are not severely affected during high magnitude
drought events (Distefano et al., 2009; Dyer et al., 2015) and consequently
invasive crayfish may have strong effects on stream ecosystems
irrespective of the occurrence of hydrological stressors (Magoulick,
2014).
4.2. Temporal and spatial persistence of crayfish invasion effects
Results from this study indicate that crayfish invasions have long
term effects on rivers across a broad biogeographical range with invasion
effects not dependent on a specific physical setting. Community
impacts are evident and have persisted within all of the regions despite
being characterised by different lithologies, flow regimes and habitat
characteristics. Despite control and invaded rivers representing discrete
communities following invasion in all sites, the degree of separation
varied between regions. The effect of invasive crayfish is heavily dependent
on original community composition as this dictates which species
are preferentially predated. Communitieswhich support abundant populations
of taxa susceptible to predationwill therefore bemore severely
affected following invasion events. We are aware of only two other
studies which have examined the long-termimpact of invasive crayfish
on benthic communities thus far (Wilson et al., 2004; McCarthy et al.,
2006), however both were focussed on lentic systems in North
America over limited spatial scales. Both studies reported significant
modifications to benthic community composition with dramatic longterm
and potentially irreversible effects on the ecosystem evident as a
whole. Results fromthe current investigation, provide the first quantitative
evidence that crayfish invasion effects within rivers are longstanding
and persist once the invading population has become
established.
Temporal trajectories of community change indicated that shifts occurred
directly after invasion in the majority of rivers examined. As the
precise date of invasion is not known for these rivers (IP indicates the
point they were detected in routine benthic samples), it is likely that
densitieswould have reached significant numbers before being formally
detected and explains the immediate shift in community following the
identified invasion point. Timelags are typically evident in invasion processes,
with the effects on communities often taking several years to appear
as densities of the invading organism increase (Sakai et al., 2001;
McCarthy et al., 2006). The ordination plots of all invaded rivers suggest
that no recovery of the communities occurred following the establishment
of crayfish populations,with control and invaded rivers displaying
distinct trajectories. Changes to the macroinvertebrate community in
invaded rivers appear to occur rapidly once crayfish densities are high
enough to be detected in kick samples (Hiley, 2003). Consequently it
is likely that there is a threshold effect at which impacts on the macroinvertebrate
community become significant and potentially irreversible.
Early detection of signal crayfish in lotic ecosystems through
routine monitoring is therefore imperative in order to manage and potentially
limit the implications of crayfish populations on the wider
macroinverterbrate community and ecosystem.
4.3. Taxa–crayfish interactions
Despite differences in the response of individual taxa following invasion,
the occurrence of a number of ubiquitous taxa significantly changed
across all regions. The classHirudinea iswidely cited as being severely affected
following crayfish invasion, typically demonstrating significant reductions
in the abundance of taxa following the establishment of large
crayfish populations (Stenroth and Nyström, 2003; Crawford et al.,
2006; Ruokonen et al., 2014). Results from this study provide further evidence
to support this with G. complanata displaying significant reductions
in occurrence following crayfish invasion for both spring and
autumn survey periods. The occurrence of E. octoculata was reduced
considerably during the autumnmonths but displayed no significant differences
during spring months (although reductions were evident). Differences
in predation of these two taxa in spring months may be as a
result of reproduction characteristics. Glossiphonids are the only leechs
to brood and carry their young, whilst Erpobdellids form cocoons on
the substrate, which may protect the young from predation during the
months of March–July (Elliott and Mann, 1979). A number of reasons
have been speculated as potentialmechanisms to account for the reduction
of Hirudinea taxa following crayfish invasion including the predatory
nature of leeches and direct competition for resources. The life history
of a number of Hirudinea species is strongly associated with gastropod
populations as a function of their ectoparasitic nature (Elliott and
Mann, 1979; Ruokonen et al., 2014), although their low mobility and
soft bodies most likely results in preferential predation by P. leniusculus
(Stenroth and Nyström, 2003).
Themostwidely cited taxa affected by invasive crayfish colonisation
are gastropods and bivalves, with reductions in species richness, abundances
and biomass widely reported (Weber and Lodge, 1990; Lodge
et al., 1994; Nyström et al., 1996, 2001; Stenroth and Nyström, 2003;
Dorn, 2013; Ruokonen et al., 2014). Results from this study indicate a
significant effect of crayfish on Radix spp.with reductions in occurrence
observed during both spring and autumn months. Gastropods have
been cited as being particularly vulnerable to crayfish predation because
of their limited speed of locomotion (Hanson et al., 1990;
Nyström and Perez, 1998; Rosewarne et al., 2013). However, not all
mollusc taxa displayed similar responses. Sphaeriidae displayed no
change in response to crayfish invasion (although some reductions
were evident during spring months), nor did the non-native mud
snail, P. antipodarum. Some life history characteristics may reduce predation
effects and, as a consequence of their high predation risk, many
gastropod species display avoidance behaviour by migrating above
the waterline for several hours (Alexander and Covich, 1991; Crowl
and Covich, 1990; Turner et al., 1999), whilst others demonstrate
changes to their life history through enhanced growth rates and
lowered reproduction rates (Hoverman et al., 2005). Under experimental
conditions P. antipodarum has been shown to avoid predation
through increased vertical migration in the presence of crayfish
(Haddaway et al., 2014). This avoidance mechanism would enable
them to evade crayfish predation and may explain why their populations
remain largely unchanged in this study despite evidence of selective
predation of crayfish on gastropod species based upon handling
times (time taken for crayfish to consume prey items, Crowl and
Covich, 1990; Nyström and Perez, 1998).
Another taxonwhich is highly adaptable in their ability to evade predation
andwhich displayed no change in occurrence for either spring or
autumn months in this study was the freshwater amphipod G. pulex.
This taxon has been widely cited as adopting various avoidance strategies
in order to evade inter and intra-specific predation, including enhanced
drift and locomotion, vertical migration and increased use of
refuges (Andersson et al., 1986; McGrath et al., 2007; Haddaway et al.,
2014). Consequently, it is likely that this species possesses a repertoire
of strategies and defences towards predation, which potentially makes
them able to evade crayfish more readily than other taxa.
Richness of aquatic insect larvae within the orders of Ephemeroptera,
Plecoptera and Trichoptera (EPT richness) is one of the most commonly
employed bioindicators internationally (e.g. Ligeiro et al., 2013;
Tonkin et al., 2015). However, the results from this study highlight
that interpretations of order level responses to disturbances associated
with invasive crayfish should be undertakenwith caution, especially orders
supporting highly variable habitat and feeding preferences and life
histories. As a result we would propose the use of greater taxonomic
resolution (genus or species level if possible) to provide the appropriate
information to identify and disentangle taxa-specific interactions
(Monk et al., 2012).
Several studies considering the impact of crayfish, have discussed
the impact of crayfish on Ephemeroptera as a whole order, rather than
individual taxa (Guan andWiles, 1998; Usio and Townsend, 2004). Results
fromprevious research suggests that the effects on Ephemeroptera
are not consistent, with some studies documenting a decrease in abundance
(McCarthy et al., 2006) or selective predation by crayfish on individuals
with a greater body size (Guan and Wiles, 1998), whilst others
have reported an increase in abundance or no change at sites where
crayfish have invaded (Keller and Ruman, 1998; Usio and Townsend,
2004; Crawford et al., 2006; Grandjean et al., 2011). Results from the
current study indicate that as an order, individual Ephemeroptera taxa
may display different responses to crayfish invasion. Within this
study, the largely ubiquitous ephemeropteran genus Baetis demonstrated
no change in occurrence during both spring and autumn months.
This most likely reflects their relatively high mobility, thus enhancing
their ability to evade crayfish predation (Peckarsky, 1996). However,
not all Ephmeroptera taxa displayed positive or benign responses to
crayfish invasion,with Caenis spp. demonstrating significant reductions
in occurrence following crayfish invasion during both spring and autumn.
This reduction may reflect habitat preferences of most Caenis
spp. for fine sediment accumulationswhich makes themprone to ingestion
or physical disturbance by foraging crayfish (Capelli, 1980;
Gutierrez-Yurrita et al., 1998; Usio and Townsend, 2004; Helms and
Creed, 2005).
The Trichoptera Hydropsyche spp., also displayed a significant reduction
in occurrence during both spring and autumn months following
crayfish invasion. The majority of feeding activity by this taxa is through
net building during spring and summer months, with net construction
typically representing simple open structures to permit filter feeding
(Edington and Hildrew, 1995). This sedentary activity in addition to
the open nature of the fixed shelter (Mackay and Wiggins, 1979) may
make them preferential prey for crayfish predation, in contrast to other
caseless caddisfly larvae which are freeliving and mobile such as
Rhyacophilidae (Elliot, 1968) or those which are much more hidden
such as Psychomyiidae in fixed enclosed tunnel like galleries (Christian
et al., 2005).
5. Conclusion
Crayfish are considered to be influential organisms within many
aquatic ecosystems, interacting with all trophic levels of the food web
(Creed, 1994;Momot, 1995). The results of this study provide direct evidence
to suggest that the implications of crayfish invasion are persistent
and result in major changes to benthic invertebrate communities,
although the effects on the community are stronger during autumn. Invasion
effects are not dependent on the physical and habitat characteristics
of the lotic ecosystem, with modifications to macroinvertebrate
communities evident across the range of bio-geographical regions typical
of lowland rivers. The specific effects on the invaded ecosystem are
however dependent on original community composition. The resulting
fauna affected and those which are responsible for the community
changes observed may therefore vary between rivers. The spread of invasive
taxa across the globemay also represent a significant challenge to
ongoing environmental monitoring programmes. The results of this research
clearly demonstrate that the predation and interaction of an invasive
species with the receiving ecosystem can significantly modify
aquatic community composition. These community modifications may
thereby potentially affect the results of widely utilised biomonitoring
indices and as a result care should be taken when interpreting routine
biomonitoring data (i.e water quality, river flow or fine sediment pressures)
where non-native/invasive taxa are known to be present
(MacNeil et al., 2013; Mathers et al., 2016). This study highlights the
value and need for further multi-scale research to fully understand the
wider spatial and temporal implications of historic invasions to complement
reach scale and mesocosm studies (Wilson et al., 2004;McCarthy
et al., 2006). This fundamental knowledge base is needed to informand
underpin management strategies which are aimed at controlling and
mitigating the effects of invasive species (Moorhouse et al., 2014).