xabstract
Invasive plants can substantially modify
wetland structure and animal distribution patterns. In
eastern North America, a Eurasian haplotype of the
common reed (Phragmites australis, haplotype M) is
invading wetlands. We studied the invasion of common
reed in freshwater wetlands of an urbanized
landscape and its effects on the distribution of
amphibians at different life stages. Specifically, we
hypothesized that the probability of reed invasion
would be greatest in wetlands near anthropic disturbances.
We predicted that the probability of desiccation
at sampling stations increases with reed cover.
Furthermore, we expected that wetlands invaded by
common reed would have lower amphibian abundances,
apparent survival, and rates of recruitment.
We conducted trapping surveys to compare anuran
assemblages of tadpoles, juveniles, and adults in 50
wetlands during two field seasons. The probability of
reed invasion in wetlands increased with the cover of
heavily-managed areas within 1,000 m and the distance
to the nearest forest, but decreased with the
length of roads within 1,000 m. The probability of
station desiccation increased with reed cover. We
found no evidence of a negative effect of reed presence
on anuran population parameters, at any life stage.
Landscape variables, such as the percent cover of
forest or heavily-managed areas within a given radius
from each wetland, influenced the abundance or the
apparent survival of juvenile frogs and the abundance
of ranid tadpoles. Our results show that amphibian
patterns depend more strongly on the structure of the
landscape surrounding wetlands than on exotic reed
invasion in wetlands.

xintroduction
Invasions by exotic species can substantially alter
biotic communities and ecosystem functions (Drake
et al. 1989; Gurevitch and Padilla 2004; Davis 2009).
Wetlands are a case in point, where exotic invasive
plants can alter water regimes, the structure, and
functions of such ecosystems (Macdonald et al. 1989;
Meyerson et al. 1999). Invasive plants monopolize
space and nutrients, excluding native flora and fauna
(Lockwood et al. 2001; Kercher and Zedler 2004;
Zedler and Kercher 2004). Exotic plant invasion can
reduce the abundance of fish (Able and Hagan 2000),
invertebrates (Cheruvelil et al. 2002; Canhoto and
Laranjeira 2007), and disturb amphibian larval development
and behavior (Maerz et al. 2005a; Watling
et al. 2011a; Cotten et al. 2012). Among invasive
plants, the common reed (Phragmites australis) has
been the focus of recent investigations in brackish and
freshwater wetlands.
The Eurasian haplotype of common reed (P.
australis, haplotype M) is one of the most aggressive
exotic plants in North America. This large perennial
grass occurs in colonies containing up to 325 stems/m2
(League et al. 2007). The range expansion of common
reed is largely associated with anthropogenic activity
(Chambers et al. 1999; Saltonstall 2002). The ecological
impacts of common reed invasion are varied. Its
rapid growth and high organic sediment accumulation
rate alterwetland hydrology and ecosystemfunctions as
well as physical and biogeochemical processes (Meyerson
et al. 1999; Windham and Lathrop 1999; Rooth
et al. 2003). The effect of the common reed on animal
communities is less straightforward than on plants.
Studies have documented both positive and negative
effects of reed establishment on invertebrates, fish, or
birds (Benoit and Askins 1999; Talley and Levin 2001;
Warren et al. 2001). To date, research on amphibians in
the context of reed invasion or other exotic plants has
almost exclusively focused on larval development
(Maerz et al. 2010; Cohen et al. 2012; Rogalski and
Skelly 2012, but see Maerz et al. 2005b and Watling
et al. 2011b).
Wetland-breeding amphibians are among the vertebrates
most likely to be influenced by reed invasion.
First, wetland-breeding amphibians have a biphasic
life cycle with important morphological and physiological
changes (Wilbur 1980). Second, amphibians
maintain a close relationship with aquatic environments
and the surrounding terrestrial habitats (Sinsch
1990; Pope et al. 2000). The epidermis of amphibians
is permeable and must remain moist to allow gas and
water exchanges (Thorson and Svihla 1943; Thorson
1955). Third, landscape composition (i.e., type and
quantitity of suitable habitat) and lanscape configuration
(e.g., patch arrangement, habitat fragmentation)
influence the connectivity between the different habitats
necessary to complete amphibian life cycles
(Semlitsch 2002; Mazerolle et al. 2005). Consequently,
a reduction in quality of either terrestrial or
aquatic habitats can potentially lower amphibian
reproductive success and limit successful colonization
(Semlitsch 2002). Reed invasion entails major
changes in wetlands (Meyerson et al. 1999). These
changes might also influence amphibian distribution
in the landscape.
In this study, we assess the importance of anthropic
disturbances on reed invasion in wetlands. We also
evaluate the impact of local and landscape characteristics
on amphibian abundance dynamics at different
life stages, after accounting for detection probability.
Here, we define local characteristics as variables at the
wetland scale such as wetland size or presence of
common reed. Landscape characteristics relate to
either landscape composition (e.g., cover of certain
habitat within a given radius) or landscape configuration
(e.g., distance to a given habitat). In these
assessments, we contrasted forest patches against
areas undergoing heavily-managed land uses such as
residential areas, parking lots, roads, and agriculture.
We hypothesized that (a) reed invasion increases with
heavily-managed areas, (b) an increase in reed cover
decreases habitat quality by increasing desiccation
rate, (c) amphibian habitat use is negatively influenced
by reed invasion with the strongest effects on early
developmental stages.

xmethods
Study area
We conducted most of our study within a 50 kmradius
of the city of Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada, in the
mixedwood plains ecozone (Fig. 1). The climate is
wet and defined by warm to hot summers and cool
winters with an average year temperature of 6.2 C and
total precipitations of 979.1 mm (Environment Canada,
http://climate.weatheroffice.gc.ca/). We targeted
50 wetlands within our study area, 25 of which were
invaded by the exotic P. australis. These wetlands
consisted of ponds, marshes, swamps, and oxbow
ponds. Because relatively undisturbed and uninvaded
sites were difficult to find within the parks of the city of
Montre´al, we also considered seven uninvaded wetlands
from the Plaisance National Park (ca. 110 km
away) to reach our goal. With these constraints, we
selected wetlands randomly within our study area.
Wetlands ranged in area between 0.08 and 3 ha, and
were separated by a minimum of 500 m. We chose this
distance to ensure independence among sites as the
amphibian species in our study have low dispersal
abilities (see ‘‘Species under study’’ section below).
Wetlands were surrounded by different environments,
either deciduous forest, agricultural fields, roads, or
urbanized lands (e.g., parking lots, residential areas).
Species under study
Nine anuran species occur in the study area: northern
leopard frog (Lithobates pipiens), wood frog
(Lithobates sylvaticus), bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeianus),
green frog (Lithobates clamitans), pickerel frog
(Lithobates palustris), American toad (Anaxyrus
americanus), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), spring
peeper (Pseudacris crucifer), and the western chorus
frog (Pseudacris triseriata). At our latitude, most of
these species breed between April and August (Wright
and Wright 1949; Desroches and Rodrigue 2004). The
amphibians in our study are semi-aquatic species, and
require a terrestrial core area adjacent to the wetland to
forage, breed, disperse, or overwinter (Semlitsch
2008). The habitat used by frogs can extend to a mean
maximum radius buffer of 368 m around breeding
wetlands (Martof 1953; Dole 1965; Semlitsch and
Bodie 2003). Studies on some of the above-mentioned
species reported migration and dispersal distances
rarely exceeding 1 km (Dole 1968; Dole, 1971; Berven
and Grudzien 1990; Dodd 1996).
Amphibian sampling
Each wetland was sampled at several fixed stations
along its perimeter. The number of stations increased
with wetland area. We established two sampling
stations for the first 25 m2 and added a station
whenever the wetland surface doubled (Adams et al.
1997). Sampling stations were positioned on the
wetland perimeter from a random selection in ArcGIS
9.3 (ESRI 2008) with the condition that adjacent
stations had to be separated by at least 30 m. For the
two smallest sites (\0.27 ha), we prioritized the
minimum distance between sampling stations rather
than the effort. Based on these rules, we established a
total of 455 sampling stations, each wetland having
between 4 and 11 sampling stations (average of 9.1 per
wetland). We sampled anurans using minnow traps
(Adams et al. 1997).
We determined the life stage of all individuals
trapped: adult, juvenile, and tadpole. We considered
an individual as a juvenile if it had metamorphosed
during the field season in which it was captured. We
based our classification of juvenile or adult on the
known minimal size of the different species in our
study area (Desroches and Rodrigue 2004). Traps
were set at the call stations described above for two
consecutive days. We monitored traps each morning to
record and release captured animals. At each trap, we
identified adults and juveniles to species, whereas
tadpoles were identified to family. We noted the
minimum temperature of the night before each data
collection, obtained from Environment Canada (http://
climate.weatheroffice.gc.ca).
We conducted one trapping session of two consecutive
days in each of the 2009 and 2010 field seasons
(21 July 2009–15 August 2009, 18 June 2010–15 July
2010). Sites within a geographical region were visited
in a random sequence in any given season. With the
repeated visits from this design, we could estimate the
influence of wetland and landscape-scale variables on
abundance and associated dynamic parameters after
accounting for imperfect detection probability (Royle
and Dorazio 2008; Dail and Madsen 2011).
Pond and landscape variables
We measured different variables at the wetlands. We
used releve´s to estimate the percent cover of common
reed and cattail (Typha latifolia, T. angustifolia, and
possibly Typha x glauca) at each wetland and at every
amphibian sampling station (see ‘‘Amphibian sampling’’
section). Most of the Typha were Typha
angustifolia L. (narrow-leaved cattail), but some were
occasionally mixed with Typha latifolia L. (broadleaved
cattail). Many individuals showed intermediate
characters, suggesting hybridization (Typha x glauca
Godr.). Identification to species (or hybrid) without
genetic analysis is virtually impossible for some
intermediate plants. For the purposes of the study,
we grouped all Typha irrespective of species. We also
considered the percent cover of emergent plants,
excluding cattail and reed. Vegetation sampling
occurred during the summer of 2009, when the aerial
structures of the species were well developed and easy
to observe. We recorded hydroperiod data at each
station (i.e., water present or absent) during the funnel
trapping sessions.
To assess the effect of landscape structure on
amphibian patterns, we computed landscape metrics in
a geographic information system using ArcGIS 9.3
(ESRI 2008). We obtained spatial data from Natural
Resources Canada, the Que´bec Ministry of Natural
Resources, and wetland cartographies of Ducks
Unlimited Canada. Based on amphibian movement
distances, we created buffers of 100, 500, and 1,000 m
around each wetland. We extracted the landscape
cover data for forest, water, and heavily-managed
areas. Heavily-managed areas consisted of residential
areas, parking lots, agricultural fields, and roads. We
also computed the total length of roads within the
above-mentioned buffers. We measured the distance
from each wetland to the nearest forest, water, and
heavily-managed area.
Statistical analyses
In all the analyses, we used a model selection and
multimodel inference approach based on the secondorder
Akaike information criterion (AICc; Burnham
and Anderson 2002). We checked the collinearity
among numeric variables and did not include any
variables with a Pearson |r|[0.7 in the same model.
To avoid problems of model convergence, we centered
numeric variables by subtracting the mean from each
value before analysis (Kleinbaum et al. 1998). All
analyses were performed in R 2.15.2 (R Core Team
2012). We computed AICc, delta AICcðDiÞ, Akaike
weights (wi) as well as model-averaged parameter
estimates ð^ bÞ with the AICcmodavg package (Burnham
and Anderson 2002; Mazerolle 2012). We present
the analytical approach along with the candidate
models used to test our biological hypotheses for each
of our data sets in the following sections.
Probability of reed invasion
We used classic logistic regression to estimate the
probability of reed invasion in the wetlands (assessed
in 2009) as a function of local wetland characteristics,
landscape cover and configuration variables. We
formulated 16 models. These included a null model
(intercept only), a wetland area and cattail cover
model, a configuration model, as well as a natural
cover model and anthropic cover model (Table 1).
Other models combined wetland variables with either
landscape cover or configuration variables. We
repeated the 16 models for each of the three spatial
scales considered (Table 1). Model fit was assessed
with the Hosmer and Lemeshow as well as the Le
Cessie and van Houwelingen goodness-of-fit tests
(Hosmer and Lemeshow 1989; Le Cessie and van
Houwelingen 1991).
Probability of station desiccation
We assessed the effect of different variables on the
probability of desiccation at the sampling stations
throughout the two field seasons using logistic
regression with random intercepts (Zuur et al. 2009).
Here, we treated each wetland and station nested
within wetland as randomeffects. For this analysis, we
considered five candidate models that consisted of: (1)
the percent cover of reed, Julian date, and sampling
year (hereafter, the main effects model), (2) main
effects with interaction between reed cover and Julian
date, (3) main effects with interaction between reed
cover and year, (4) main effects with interaction
between Julian date and year, (5) a null model with
random intercepts (no fixed effects). Parameters were
estimated with the Laplace approximation to the
likelihood in R with the lme4 package (Bates et al.
2012).
Amphibian abundance dynamics
Our trapping data followed a robust design where each
sampling season was considered a primary period, and
with two secondary periods (nights) within each
primary period (e.g., Pollock 1982). We used dynamic
N-mixture models (Dail and Madsen 2011) to estimate
the abundance of the initial year (k2009), the
recruitment rate (c), the apparent survival probability
(x), and the detection probability of individuals (p).
Here, apparent survival denotes the complement of
emigration and mortality. This approach consists in
using counts of unmarked individuals collected in a
given season at a suite of sites. Dynamic N-mixture
models estimate the abundance at each site, as well as
parameters describing changes in abundance across
seasons (i.e., c and x), after accounting for imperfect
detectability. Our model assumes that the abundance
at a site does not change between the two consecutive
nights of trapping in a given season, and that the
abundance, the rate of recruitment, as well as the
probabilities of apparent survival and detection are
modeled appropriately with covariates. The model
also assumes that detections within each site are
independent across visits, and that the abundance
follows a Poisson distribution.
We tallied the total number of individuals captured
for each life stage and species (or family for tadpoles)
across all sampling stations of a given site on a given
day. These counts formed the data in the N-mixture
models. We analyzed data separately for adults and
juveniles of each species. For each species, we
formulated 19 hypotheses involving wetland characteristics
and landscape variables on abundance, recruitment,
and apparent survival (Table 2). To minimize
the number of parameters estimated, we considered the
following scenarios on either abundance, recruitment
rate, or apparent survival: (1) additive effects of reed
presence and wetland area (wetland additive model),
(2) interactive effects of reed presence and wetland
area (wetland interaction model), (3) landscape configuration
model, (4) landscape cover within 100 m,
(5) landscape cover within 500 m, and (6) landscape
cover within 1,000 m. The landscape configuration
model included the distance of each wetland relative to
the closest forest, water, and heavily-managed areas
(agricultural, urban, or road). Landscape composition
models included the cover of forest habitat and that of
heavily-managed areas (agricultural and urban cover
combined) within a given radius of the three radii (e.g.,
100, 500, and 1,000 m).
For each scenario on the demographic parameters
described above, we tested three hypotheses on
detection probability (p): (1) additive effects of
sampling effort (number of sampling stations at a
given wetland), minimum air temperature on the night
before trap checking, and year, (2) additive effect of
minimum air temperature and interactive effects of
effort and year, (3) additive effect of sampling effort
and interactive effects of minimum air temperature
and year. Thus, we considered 57 models to test our
hypotheses (i.e., 19 scenarios on population parameters
9 three scenarios on detectability). Reviewers
suggested to include models with the effects of
precipitation on detection probability. To address
reviewer concerns, we obtained total precipitation
24 h before trap checking from Environment Canada
(http://climate.weatheroffice.gc.ca). We included this
variable on three new scenarios (i.e., 57 models) on
detection probability: (1) additive effects of sampling
effort, total precipitation 24 h before trap checking,
and year, (2) additive effect of total precipitation and
interactive effects of effort and year, (3) additive effect
of sampling effort and interactive effects of total
precipitation and year. We contrasted these models
against a null model that considered all parameters
constant (k c x p).
Ranid tadpoles were analyzed as a single group as
they could not be identified to species in the field.
Tadpoles captured in our traps were of size classes
near metamorphosis. We modeled their abundance
assuming complete turnover between the 2 years. This
assumption seemed appropriate in our case as tadpoles
reaching metamorphosis are not available for capture
as tadpoles the next year.We implemented this model
by using single season N-mixture models (Royle
2004), where we modeled abundance with a zeroinflated
Poisson distribution. In this case, we included
a year factor on abundance in all models. We
considered the same scenarios on abundance and on
detection probability as for the adult and juvenile
analyses above. We also included a null model with
both abundance and detectability constant, for a total
of 19 models (Table 2).
We tested the fit of the top-ranked N-mixture
models with a parametric bootstrap approach based on
the v2 statistic and 5,000 bootstrap samples. Parameter
estimates were obtained by maximum likelihood using
the unmarked package (Fiske et al. 2012) and model
selection was implemented with the AICcmodavg
package (Mazerolle 2012).


xresults


xdiscussion
Forty-five wetlands (91 %) retained water during our
sampling seasons, although some sampling stations
dried up. Reed cover in invaded wetlands ranged
between 1 and 64 %, with a mean ± SD of
27.8 ± 18.7 %. Cattail covered 0–93.4 % of wetland
surface area. Forest and water cover around wetlands
in buffers of 100, 500, and 1,000 m, ranged between
8.9 and 100 %, whereas the cover of heavily-managed
areas in these buffers ranged from 0 to 91.1 %. The
distance between heavily-managed areas and wetlands
varied between 0 and 356 m. In contrast, forested
areas were between 0 and 1,085 m from wetlands.
Probability of reed invasion
There was no indication of lack of fit for the models.
Both the Hosmer and Lemeshow and Le Cessie and van
Houwelingen tests produced P[0.11. There was
considerable model selection uncertainty among the
reed invasion models, with four models having Di\2.
The highest-ranked model consisted of the length of
roads and cover of heavily-managed areas within
1,000 m of the wetland and was followed very closely
by a second model combining the same two variables
with wetland area and cattail cover (Table 3). The
third-ranked model consisted of the distance to
landscape elements, whereas a fourth model included
the wetland area and cattail cover. The probability of
reed invasion in wetlands marginally increased with
the cover of heavily-managed areas within 1,000 m
(^ b ¼ 2:94; 95%CI : 0:03; 5:91; Fig. 2a), but
decreased with the length of roads within 1,000 m
(^ b ¼ 0:08; 95%CI : 0:16; 0:01; Fig. 2b). The
probability of reed invasion also tended to increase
with the distance to the nearest forest
(^ b ¼ 3:76; 95%CI : 0:31; 7:84; Fig. 2c). In contrast,
reed invasion probability did not vary with
wetland area, cattail cover, distance to nearest heavilymanaged
area, and distance to nearest water.
We predicted that reed invasion would increase
with anthropic disturbances such as habitat loss
through urban expansion. The probability of reed
invasion in a wetland increased with the percent cover
of heavily-managed areas within 1,000 m. This result
was consistent with our hypothesis. Similarly, Chambers
et al. (1999), Bart et al. (2006), and Silliman and
Bertness (2004) noted that common reed is closely
associated with areas undergoing anthropic disturbances.
We also observed that the probability of reed
invasion increased with the distance to the nearest
forest. Shoreline areas where woody vegetation has
been removed tend to have greater cover of common
reed (Silliman and Bertness 2004). Common reed is a
wetland species thriving in open areas, and there is
evidence that trees can impose barriers to reed
dispersal (Brisson et al. 2010). Our results support
the latter hypothesis.
Surprisingly, we found that the probability of reed
invasion decreased with increasing length of roads
within 1,000 m. This result was unexpected, because
reeds disperse along road corridors (Lelong et al.
2007; Brisson et al. 2010). The type of road, road
width, and surface deposit may also influence the
occurrence of common reed along roads, with a
greater probability of reed establishment along highways
(Lelong et al. 2009). In our case, we did not
record data on the previously-mentioned road
attributes, which could explain the discrepancies we
report.
Probability of desiccation
Out of the 455 sampling stations, 126 dried at least
once during our two sampling seasons. There were
similar amounts of precipitations and mean temperatures
during the two field seasons (339 mm and
18 C in 2009, 379 mm and 20 C in 2010). The
model with the interaction between year and date
had the entire support (Table 3). The probability of
the station drying out increased with reed cover
ð^ b ¼ 1:87; 95%CI : 0:47; 3:28Þ. Furthermore, the
probability of desiccation increased with Julian date
in 2010, but did not vary with Julian date in 2009
ð^ b ¼ 0:04; 95%CI : 0:03; 0:06Þ.
We predicted that increasing reed cover would
reduce habitat quality by increasing the desiccation
rate at sampling stations. As expected, the probability
of desiccation at a station increased with the reed
cover. Our results are consistent with Chambers et al.
(1999). Common reed has a high transpiration rate
which can decrease the water level (Burba et al. 1999;
Windham and Lathrop 1999). A reduction in water
level would primarily influence tadpole development,
as shortening the hydroperiod can reduce the time to
metamorphosis (Laurila and Kujasalo 1999). Early
metamorphosis at a smaller size can induce a lower
post-metamorphic survival rate compared to development
under longer hydroperiods (Laurila and Kujasalo
1999; Altwegg and Reyer 2003).
Abundance dynamics
We captured an average of 15.3 and 14.9 anurans
(adults and juveniles) per 100 trap nights in 2009 and
2010, respectively, where one trap night equates to one
trap open for one night. We caught potential predators
of amphibians including fish, leeches, giant water bugs
(Belostoma sp.), diving water beetles (Dytiscus sp.),
dragonfly larvae (Aeshna sp.), and water scorpions
(Ranatra fusca). Due to the high aquatic predator
occurrence and low variability among wetlands
(80–96 % of the wetlands), we could not include
these variables in our analyses.
We trapped an average of 89.8 and 47.1 ranid
tadpoles per 100 trap nights in 2009 and 2010,
respectively. Most of the anurans captured were green
frogs and leopard frogs. No American toads or western
chorus frogs were caught. Green frog and leopard frog
captures were sufficient to attempt analyses for each of
their life stages (tadpoles, juveniles, and adults). Our
goodness-of-fit test with 5,000 iterations indicated that
N-mixture models fit the data for most groups
(P between 0.24 and 0.26), except for adult leopard
frogs and juvenile green frogs for which the fit was
marginal (P = 0.06 and 0.04, respectively).
For most groups, models including landscape-scale
variables on population parameters ranked as well or
higher than those with wetland-scale variables
(Table 4). The effect of landscape variables on
abundance and vital rates varied across groups. The
highest-ranked models for juvenile green frogs included
the effect of landscape cover on annual apparent survival
and constant abundance and recruitment rate. Annual
apparent survival of juvenile green frogs increased with
the cover of heavily-managed areas within 500 m
ð^ b ¼ 18:22; 95%CI : 2:27; 34:17; Fig. 3a). For adult
green frogs, the top-ranked models consisted of
wetland characteristics on abundance with constant
recruitment rate and annual apparent survival
(Table 4). The abundance of adult green frogs in
2009 was greater in wetlands invaded by reeds than in
wetlands without reeds ð^ b ¼ 1:17; 95%CI : 0:29;
2:05; Fig. 3b). Furthermore, the abundance of adult
green frogs in 2009 decreased with increasing wetland
area ð^ b ¼ 1:72; 95%CI : 3:32;0:13; Fig. 3c).
The top-ranked models for juvenile leopard frogs
consisted of landscape cover within 100 m on the
abundance of the first year, and constant rate of
recruitment and apparent annual survival (Table 4).
The abundance of juvenile leopard frogs in 2009
decreased with increasing forest cover within 100 m
ð^ b ¼ 1:69; 95%CI : 2:98;0:39; Fig. 3d) and the
cover of heavily-managed areas within 100 m
(^ b ¼ 2:41; 95%CI : 3:78;1:04; Fig. 3e). The
top-ranked model for adult leopard frogs consisted
of landscape cover variables within 500 m on recruitment
rate, with constant abundance and apparent
survival. However, this model was followed closely by
the null model (Di ¼ 1:61, Table 4). None of the
population parameters of adult leopard frogs varied
with the variables we considered.
For ranid tadpoles, the model consisting of landscape
cover within 500 m on abundance was the most
parsimonious and had almost all of the support
(wi = 0.91, Table 4). The abundance of this group
increased with the amount of forest cover within
500 m (^ b ¼ 2:35; 95%CI : 1:79; 2:90; Fig. 4a) and
the cover of heavily-managed areas within 500 m
(^ b ¼ 3:39; 95%CI : 2:86; 3:92; Fig. 4b). The abundance
of ranid tadpoles was greater in 2010 than 2009
ð^ b ¼ 0:87; 95%CI : 0:02; 1:75Þ.
We hypothesized that amphibian abundance and
vital rates in wetlands would be lower in the presence
of common reed. In a recent review, Martin and
Murray (2011) predicted that the establishment of
exotic plants could negatively impact anuran habitat
use, species diet and interactions, and reproductive
success. However, we found no negative effects of
reed presence on the demographic parameters we
considered. In fact, the abundance of adult green frogs
in 2009 was greater in wetlands invaded by reed than
in wetlands without reed. In an observational field
study, Meyer (2003) observed amphibian juveniles
and adults in reed stands, but did not detect tadpoles in
these habitats. In our case, we detected all life stages at
capture stations among reed stands.
Cohen et al. (2012) observed no differences in the
development of tadpoles reared in habitats dominated
by either native plants or exotic plants including
common reed. Two field studies focusing on adult
amphibians report negative effects of invasive plant
species. Watling et al. (2011b) report lower amphibian
species richness in plots invaded by Lonicera
maackii than in uninvaded plots, potentially related to
low temperatures induced by the presence of L.
maackii. Maerz et al. (2005b) observed that the
invasive Japanese knotweed (Fallopia japonica)
reduces foraging success of adult L. clamitans.
Based on the reports published so far, common reed
invasion would mostly influence the larval period.
Indeed, Perez et al. (2013) observed that wood frog (L.
sylvaticus) tadpoles developped more slowly under
medium and high reed densities than under a control.
This negative effect might be offset by the reduction of
the water level by common reed, though it remains to
be confirmed. The results from our observational study
oppose those of experiments conducted with tadpoles
in mesocosms or field cages. In a study of nine wetland
plant species, Cohen et al. (2012) reported negative
impacts of certain plant traits, namely soluble phenolics
and litter C:N ratio, on the larval development of
three anuran species. These traits were independent of
plant origin (native or exotic). In contrast, Rogalski
and Skelly (2012) reported positive effects of reed
litter on bullfrog larval development. The discrepancies
between manipulative experiments and our own
study suggest that reed presence has a weak effect
relative to other wetland characteristics or landscape
variables.
With a single exception, wetland-scale characteristics
had weak effects on amphibian variables in our
study. The abundance of adult green frogs in 2009
decreased with increasing wetland size. Some authors
report that amphibian presence increases with pond
size (Laan and Verboom 1990; Bradford et al. 2003;
Hamer and Mahony 2010), whereas others indicate a
negative relationship (Knutson et al. 2004). Amphibian
species richness, occupancy, and abundance can
vary with a number of wetland variables such as water
body depth and vegetation cover (Knapp et al. 2003;
Knutson et al. 2004; Pearl et al. 2005; Hamer and
Parris 2011). The presence of aquatic predators can
also influence amphibian patterns, but often varies
with the type of predator (Babbitt et al. 2003; Porej
and Hetherington 2005; Shulse et al. 2013). Unfortunately,
the high occurrence of fish and invertebrate
predators in our wetlands precluded their inclusion in
our analyses. The weak relationships of amphibian
demographic parameters and wetland-scale variables
might be due to the high urbanization in our landscape.
However, this should be substantiated with a formal
evaluation of interactive effects by considering landscapes
with different levels of urbanization.
Landscape cover influenced the abundance or vital
rates of three groups. Ranid tadpole abundance
increased with the proportion of forest cover around
a wetland. This suggests that forest habitat in the
landscape promotes the recruitment of ranid tadpoles.
Forest habitat in the vicinity of the wetland may
facilitate individual movements to wetlands, as juveniles
of certain species are more likely to move toward
forest than open-field habitats (Rothermel and Semlitsch
2002). No adult or juvenile parameter increased
with forest cover in our study, although other studies
report a positive association between occurrence of
pond-breeding species and forest cover or forest
proximity (Hecnar and M’Closkey 1998; Guerry and
Hunter 2002; Weyrauch and Grubb 2004; Hamer and
Parris 2011).
Species responded differently to the cover of
heavily-managed areas around wetlands. The apparent
survival of juvenile green frogs increased with the
cover of heavily-managed areas within 500 m of the
wetland. The abundance of ranid tadpoles followed a
similar pattern. In contrast, the abundance of juvenile
leopard frogs in 2009 decreased with increasing cover
of forest and heavily-managed areas within 100 m.
Heavily-managed environments in our study consisted
of residential areas, agricultural fields, and roads.
Amphibian distribution is influenced by environmental
variables such as the availability of breeding,
foraging, and overwintering areas (Wilbur 1980;
Semlitsch 2002). The quantity, accessibility, and
suitability of these habitats also determine amphibian
population structure (Semlitsch 2002). Hostile
environments in the landscape, such as those encountered
in urbanized landscapes, can hinder movements
of individuals (Rothermel 2004; Mazerolle and Desrochers
2005; Mazerolle and Vos 2006). For instance,
roads or urban areas pose barriers to juvenile dispersal
and adult seasonal migrations (Marsh et al. 2005;
Andrews et al. 2008; Bouchard et al. 2009). Similarly,
Knutson et al. (1999) and Hamer and Parris (2011)
reported that anuran species richness decreased with
the presence of urban areas or the density of
residences. The expansion of heavily-managed areas
in the vicinity of wetlands may concentrate individuals
in wetlands in the short term, while reducing genetic
diversity in the long term, though this remains
speculative and should be tested formally.
Nonetheless, increasing road density ultimately lowers
amphibian occupancy, abundance, and genetic
diversity (Fahrig et al. 1995; Vos and Chardon 1998;
Vos et al. 2001).
Adults and juveniles are the most mobile amphibian
life stages. We expected that these life stages would
respond to landscape-scale variables more strongly
than tadpoles. Unexpectedly, we found that juveniles
and tadpoles responded to landscape characteristics,
but not adults. The juvenile stage is associated with
dispersal and long-distance colonization events,
although generally shorter than 10 km (Dole 1971;
Berven and Grudzien 1990; Semlitsch 2008). Furthermore,
juveniles lose water more rapidly than adults
(Thorson 1955). Our results suggest that the landscape
is more permeable to adult than juvenile movements.
This is consistent with higher rates of evaporative
water loss and greater dispersal distances than adults.
However, the interpretation of landscape variables on
tadpoles is more problematic and may reflect indirect
effects on adults. For instance, adults may have higher
reproductive outputs when forest cover within 500 m
is high, but further investigation on this issue is
warranted.
Detection probability
The detection probability of juvenile green frogs was
greater in 2010 than in 2009 (^ b ¼ 1:28; 95%CI :
0:13; 2:43, Fig. 5a) and marginally increased with
precipitation in the previous 24 h (^ b ¼ 0:05; 95%CI :
0:005; 0:096, Fig. 5b). However, detection probability
of the group did not vary with sampling effort or
minimum air temperature. The detection probability
of adult green frogs increased marginally with
sampling effort (^ b ¼ 0:23; 95%CI : 0:02; 0:48,
Fig. 5c), but did not vary with any other variable.
The detection probability of juvenile leopard frogs
increased with sampling effort, but its effect was
weaker in 2010 than 2009 (year  effort interaction;
^
b ¼ 0:91; 95%CI : 1:60;0:21, Fig. 5d). Despite
this interaction, detection probability was substantially
higher in 2010 than 2009 (^ b ¼ 2:7; 95%
CI : 0:49; 4:91). The probability of detection of juvenile
leopard frogs increased with the amount of
precipitation in the previous 24 h (^ b ¼ 0:15; 95%
CI : 0:00; 0:30, Fig. 5e), but did not vary with air
temperature. Detectability of adult leopard frogs did
not vary with any of the sampling covariates we
considered. The detection probability of tadpoles
increased with minimum air temperature in 2010,
but did not vary with the variable in 2009 (^ b ¼
0:26; 95%CI : 0:17; 0:36, Fig. 5f). Detection probability
of the group did not vary with precipitation on
the previous day or sampling effort.
The probability of detection varied with sampling
year, minimum air temperature within 24 h, total
precipitation within 24 h, and sampling effort for
some species. Weather variables influence amphibian
breeding activity (Obert 1976; Oseen and Wassersug
2002; Steen et al. 2013) and our reported effect of air
temperature on detectability (i.e., capture) is consistent
with such patterns. As we expected, the effect of
some variables on detectability varied with year, as
was the case of air temperature for ranid tadpoles and
juvenile leopard frogs. We included covariates known
to influence detectability to improve estimates of
abundance, recruitment, and apparent survival (Mac-
Kenzie et al. 2006, Royle and Dorazio 2008).
Detectability in our study was a nuisance parameter,
in the sense that it must be included in the
analysis, while not being the focus of the analysis. In
our case, abundance dynamics were the focus of our
study. During a sampling event in the field (e.g., trap
open for 24 h), some individuals are likely missed
(Williams et al. 2002). As a result, counts provide a
minimum number of individuals present at a site
during the sampling period. Counts are difficult to
compare across sites without making strong assumptions
about detectability being constant across habitat
type, sites, season, weather conditions, sex, or sampling
method (Anderson 2001; Mazerolle et al. 2007).
This problem has been addressed by a large class of
models in animal ecology. For example, capture–
mark–recapture, distance sampling, and site occupancy
models estimate the biological parameters of
interest after having accounted for imperfect detectability
or capture probability (Mazerolle et al. 2007;
Williams et al. 2002). Such approaches provide better
estimates than methods assuming that detectability is
constant, allowing one to compare population parameters
across studies, species, and habitats (Mazerolle
et al. 2007; Williams et al. 2002).
Conclusion
Wetlands in the vicinity of heavily-managed areas
were more likely to be invaded by common reed. The
probability of desiccation at stations increased with
the percent cover of reed. However, we found no
negative effect of reed invasion on the distribution of
amphibian tadpole, juvenile, or adult life stages in our
urbanized landscape. The abundance or vital rates of
juvenile green frogs, juvenile leopard frogs, and ranid
tadpoles varied with the amount of forest cover and
heavily-managed areas within 100 and 500 m. In the
context of plant invasion, the landscape surrounding
breeding wetlands had a greater influence on amphibian
patterns than the invasion of common reed and
wetland characteristics. The more important drivers of
population dynamics in our system may be reproductive
output and movements of juveniles and adults
outside wetlands, rather than reed invasion.