xabstract

 We compared the species richness and abundance of ﬁsh, zooplankton and phytoplankton in nine mesotrophic coastal shallow lakes (Northeastern Brazil) with and without the exotic predator cichlid tucunare ´ or ‘peacock bass’ (Cichla cf. ocellaris). We hypothesized that the introduction of tucunare ´ would lead to decreased abundance and species diversity of native ﬁsh assemblages and cause indirect effects on the abundance and species diversity of the existing
communities of zooplankton and phytoplankton and on water transparency. Our hypotheses were only partly conﬁrmed. Although ﬁsh richness and diversity were, in fact, drastically lower in the lakes hosting tucunare ´,nosigniﬁcant differencesweretracedintotal ﬁsh catch per unit of effort, zooplankton and phytoplankton biomass, plankton diversity or the zooplankton:phytoplankton biomass (TZOO:TPHYTO) ratio. However, zooplankton biomass and TZOO:TPHYTO
tended to be higher and the phytoplankton biomass lower in lakes with tucunare ´. Our analyses therefore suggest that the introduction of tucunare ´ had marked effect on the ﬁsh community structure and diversity in these shallow lakes, but only modest cascading effects on zooplankton and phytoplankton.

xintroduction
Intentionally or accidentally, introduction of exotic species to areas where they do not naturally belong has increased with the improvements in transport systems and globalization of economic activities (Mack et al. 2000). These exotic species may affect biodiversity via competition with native species for resources, alteration of the habitat, hybridization, predation and transmission of pathogens (Fernando 1991; Agostinho and Julio 1996; Rahel 2002). Introduction of exotic species has long been considered the second strongest threat to global biodiversity after habitat loss (Simberloff 2003; Clavero and Garcı ´a-Berthou 2005). However, in many cases, available data supporting that invasions cause extinctions are anecdotal, speculative and based upon limited ﬁeld observations (Gurevitch and Padilla 2004). Of the 762 species globally documented to have become extinct as a result of human activities in the past few 100 years, only\2% were attributed to alien species (Gurevitch and Padilla 2004). Nevertheless, many species have been introduced while their impact on native species was unknown. In Brazil, for instance, ﬁsh introductions from the Amazon basin to other watersheds have become a common practice, and species of the genus Cichla are now widespread in many watersheds outside the Amazon. These voracious predators have been introduced into many ponds, lakes and reservoirs mainly to improve artisanal and recreational ﬁsheries (Agostinho et al. 2004), but also to control stunted populations of other exotic ﬁsh species such as tilapia (Fisher and Grant 1994). The few existing studies on the impacts of Cichla introductions show a strong reduction in ﬁsh species richness and abundance upon introduction (Zaret and Paine 1973; Godinho et al.
1994; Molina et al. 1996; Latini and Petrere 2004; Pelicice and Agostinho 2009). Besides direct predation effects on their prey, piscivorous ﬁsh can indirectly affect lower trophic levels and ecosystem processes such as primary production and nutrient cycling (Carpenter et al. 2001; Simon and Townsend 2003; Eby et al. 2006). Suchcascadingeffects oftoppredatorsarewellknown from temperate lakes, and stocking of piscivorous ﬁsh has even been used in water quality management to help controlling algal biomass and primary production in eutrophic temperate lakes (Carpenter et al. 1995; Hansson etal.1998; Jeppesen etal.2007; Søndergaard et al. 2008). Several factors, including lake productivity and presence of refuge, may inﬂuence trophic cascades and buffer some of the ecosystem effects of top predators (Pace et al. 1999; Tessier and Woodruff 2002; Persson 1999; Borer et al. 2005). Presumably, the cascading effects of predatory ﬁsh are weaker in tropical than in temperate lakes (Jeppesen et al. 2010; Gelo ´s et al. 2010; Danger et al. 2009), which has been attributed to: (1) higher abundance and diversity of small ﬁsh species with continuous reproduction, (2) higher ﬁsh aggregation within the vegetation, and (3) more omnivory by ﬁsh and less specialist piscivory (Lazzaro 1997; Jeppesen et al. 2007, 2010). However, the trophic dynamics and role of ﬁsh in warm lakes are much less well understood than for temperate lakes (Jeppesen et al. 2007). Because many lakes and reservoirs in the Neotropical region suffer from the adverse effects of introduction of Amazonian piscivores of the genus Cichla, ecological studies of introduction impacts are urgently needed. In the present study we assessed the impact of the introduction of the exotic piscivore tucunare ´ (Cichla cf. ocellaris) on the native ﬁsh and plankton communities of tropical coastal lakes in Northeastern Brazil. Particularly we aimed at evaluating whether tucunare ´ introductions would lead to a reduction in ﬁsh abundance, species richness and diversity and, subsequently, to cascading trophic effects on zooplankton and phytoplankton communities, resulting in lower phytoplankton biomass and higher water transparency. For this purpose, we compared the ﬁsh, zooplankton and phytoplankton communities of two groups of lakes with and without tucunare ´, respectively, but with approximately similar physico-chemical characteristics.


xmethods
Study area
The study was carried out from September to October 2005 in 9 coastal shallow lakes located in Rio Grande do Norte State, Brazil. These lakes are included in a more comprehensive survey within the framework of the SALGA project (see Kosten et al. 2009 for more details). The lakes are located in a tropical humid regionwithanannualmeantemperatureandrainfallof 28C and 1,273 mm and have an average area of 0.08 ± 0.02 ha, respectively. The proportion of the water column inhabited by macrophytes (PVI) was low (2 ± 2%), whereas the proportions of emerged and submerged macrophytes were 17 ± 12 and 23 ± 24%, respectively. One group of ﬁve southern lakes held tucunare ´, while the other group consisting of four northern lakes did not hold tucunare ´ (Fig. 1). Both groups of lakes are surroundedby sanddunesand are entirely dependent on groundwater for their water supply (Cunha et al. 1990). By chance or by intention, tucunare ´ was ﬁrst introduced in southern Lake Redonda between 1989 and 1990 (Molina et al. 1996) and subsequently spread
to Lakes Boa A ´ gua, Ferreira Grande, Carcara ´ and Urubu, either duetoconnectivityamongthelakesorto introduction. Despite the lack of data on most lakes, available information on Lake Redonda indicates that before tucunare ´ introduction the existing ﬁsh fauna exhibited only native species (Table 1).
Sample collection and analysis
We sampled the ﬁsh community of each lake using a stratiﬁed random approach with multi-mesh gillnets (Appelberg 2000). Each net was 30 m long and 1.5 m deep and consisted of 12 different mesh sizes ranging from 5 to 55 mm (knot to knot), randomly distributed in 2.5 m sections. The number of nets placed in each lake varied between 3 and 5, depending on lake area. The nets were randomly distributed in pelagic and littoral areas and were placed at dusk and removed at dawn. All ﬁsh caught were counted, measured (full length to the nearest cm) and weighed (to the nearest g). Water samples were collected using a 2-m PVC tube with a one-way foot valve at the end at 20 different points randomly selected in each lake and including both pelagic and macrophyte-covered areas.
All pelagic random points were integrated in a single sample from which subsamples were taken for total nitrogen,total phosphorus, chlorophylla (CHLA),and phytoplankton analyses. In the ﬁeld, oxygen concentrations of the lake were measured with an OxiGuard probe (type ‘Handy Gamma’). Turbidity and pH were measured with a multiparameter analyser U-22 HORIBA (Kyoto, Japan), and a Secchi disk was used to determine water transparency. Total phosphorus (TP) and total nitrogen (TN) were analyzed using a continuous ﬂow analyzer (Skalar Analytical BV) following NNI protocols (NNI 1986, 1990), with the exception of UV/Persulfate destruction which was not executed beforehand but integrated in the system. Chlorophyll a was extracted from ﬁlters (GF/C S&S) with 96% ethanol and absorbance was measured at 665 and 750 nm (Nusch 1980). Phytoplankton was quantiﬁed according to Utermo ¨hl (1958) using an inverted microscope. Before counting, the samples were allowed to settle for 3 h for each centimeter height of the chamber (Margalef 1983). The individuals (cells, colonies and ﬁlaments) were
enumerated in random ﬁelds as proposed by Uhelinger (1964), with an error smaller than 20% and a conﬁdence interval of 95% (Lund et al. 1958). The organisms were identiﬁed according to the main morphological and morphometrical characteristics of the vegetative and reproductive phases. To estimate phytoplankton biovolume, at least 25 individuals from each species were measured and approximations of similar geometric solids were used to estimate volume (Hillebrand et al. 1999). Two liters from each of the 20 random points were pooled into a bulk sample for quantitative zooplankton analysis (ﬁnal volume = 40 l). The sample was ﬁltered through a 50 lm sieve and preserved in a 4% formaldehyde solution. Zooplankton was counted in 1–5 ml aliquots depending on sample concentration. Counting was ceased after reaching 100 specimens of the most abundant species of each taxonomic group (rotifers, copepods, cladocerans). If necessary, the whole sample was counted. For each lake, we measured at least 20 individuals of each rotifer species found and calculated their biovolume (lm3) using
geometric formulas (Ruttner-Kolisko 1977). For rare rotifer species and those undergoing important changes in morphology due to formaldehyde, individual biomass data were obtained from the literature (Dumont et al. 1975; Bottrell et al. 1976; Pauli 1989). The same procedure was used to estimate copepod nauplii biomass. For copepods and cladocerans, we measured 50 specimens of each species and estimated biomass using length/weight regressions available in the literature (McCauley 1984; Bottrell et al. 1976; Culver et al. 1985; Gu ¨ntzel et al. 2003). To elucidate differences in the potential grazing pressure of total zooplankton (TZOO) on total phytoplankton biomass between the two groups of lakes, we used the biomass (dry weight) ratio TZOO:TPHYTO, where TPHYTO was calculated as CHLA *66 (Jeppesen et al. 1994). The mean depth of the lake was determined using depth measurements from 20 random points along transects perpendicular to the longest axis of the lake.The lake area was determined using Orthorectiﬁed Landsat Thematic Mapper Mosaics for the year 2000. Ifthe image was cloudy, images from 1990 were used instead. In rare cases when the image deviated strongly from the area observed in the ﬁeld, all waypoints measured in the ﬁeld were plotted on top of the image, and a ‘best matching’ polygon, whose area was determined, was drawn around it.
Data analysis
As the number of lakes was too low to allow test for normality, we used a Mann–Whitney U test to compare the differences between the variables in the two groups of lakes (a = 0.05). The number of species, N0, was used as a measurement of species richness, and Hill’s N1 and N2 (Hill 1973) were used as indices of species diversity. These diversity numbers, which are in units of number of species, express whatHillcalls ‘theeffectivenumberofspecies present in a sample’. This effective number of species is a measure of the degree to which proportional abundances are distributed among the species. Explicitly, N0 is the number of all species in the sample (regardless of their abundances), N1 is the number of abundant species, and N2 is the number of very abundant species in the sample. In other words, the effective numberof species isa measure ofthe number of species in the sample where each species is
weighted by its abundances. As indices of diversity, Hill’s numbers are intuitively appealing to ecologists. While some vagueness still remains in their interpretation (Hill 1973), we ﬁnd them much less confusing than other available indices. For computing the Hill’s N1 and N2 indices, we used Simpson’s (Simpson 1949) and Shannon’s (Shannon and Weaver 1949) indices, respectively, represented by the following formulas: k¼X S i¼1 niðni 1Þ nðn1Þ H0 ¼X S i¼1 ni n  ln ni n  hi where ni is the number of individuals of each species in the sample and n is the total number of individuals in the sample. The formulas for Hill’s indices are: N2 ¼ 1 k and N1 = eH0, where k and H0 are the Simpson’s and Shannon’s indices, respectively. In order to compare the richness of ﬁsh, zooplankton and phytoplankton between the two groups of lakes, we rareﬁed the data from these communities using the actual minimum number of individuals sampled in a single lake as the bottom line for the analysis. For example, let’s say that our actual minimum number of individuals is n, so this would be the number of species in all lakes if we had caught only n individuals in each lake. Rarefaction is a statistical method used for estimating the number of species expected in a random sample of individuals taken from a sampling. Given the number of individuals of each species that is sampled, one can calculate the number of species expectedly occurring in a smaller sample of n individuals (Sanders 1968; Hurlbert 1971; Fager 1972; Simberloff 1972; Heck et al. 1975; James and Rathbun 1981; Gotelli and Colwell 2001). For the rarefaction analysis, we used the Community Ecology Package in R (Oksanen et al. 2010).


xresults
Morphometry and physico-chemical variables
The two groups of lakes did not differ signiﬁcantly in area, but the lakes without tucunare ´ were signiﬁcantly shallower (Fig. 2). We found no signiﬁcant differences in the TN, TP, DO and CHLA concentrations between the two groups of lakes; nor did the water pH,
conductivity and turbidity, CHLA:TP and CHLA:TN ratios exhibit any differences. However, water transparency expressed as Secchi depth was signiﬁcantly higher in the (deeper) lakes with tucunare ´ (Fig. 2).
Fish community
In the lakes without tucunare ´, 11 ﬁsh species, all indigenous, were caught (Table 1), while in lakes with tucunare ´ only four indigenous species were caught togetherwiththreenon-nativespecies.Characiformes, omnivores/planktivores and total ﬁsh catch per unit of effort (total CPUE) expressed as weight of ﬁsh caught per unit of gillnet area (g m-2) tended to be lower in lakes with tucunare ´, but the differences were not signiﬁcant (Table 2). However, species richness (N0 and expected (N0 min) number of species, and diversity (N1) were signiﬁcantly lower in lakes with tucunare ´ (Table 3).
The zooplankton community
In terms of biomass, the zooplankton community was mainly composed of cladocerans and copepods. Rotifers presented the bulk of zooplankton species. They accounted for 37 and 61%, respectively, of total zooplankton biomass in lakes without tucunare ´, and for 34 and 53%, respectively, in lakes with tucunare ´. Zooplankton biomass tended to be higher in lakes with tucunare ´, while no signiﬁcant differences in rotifers, cladocerans, copepods or total zooplankton biomass appeared between the two sets of lakes (Table 2). Also, no difference could be tracked for zooplankton species richness and diversity (Table 3).
The phytoplankton community
Phytoplankton was basically composed of cyanobacteria and chlorophyceans, each constituting, respectively, 35% of total phytoplankton biovolume in the
non-tucunare ´ lakes, and 82 and 11% of total biovolume in the lakes with tucunare ´. However, except for total phytoplankton biovolume, which was marginally signiﬁcantly higher in lakes with tucunare ´, no differences occurred in phytoplankton biovolume between the two groups of lakes (Table 2). Similarly, no differences were observed in phytoplankton species richness and diversity (Table 3) or in the TZOO: TPHYTO ratio, though this ratio tended to be higher in lakes with tucunare ´ (T?=0.29 ± 0.16; T-=0.14 ± 0.14) (Fig. 2).

xdiscussion
Our results suggest that tucunare ´ introduction decreased abundance of some ﬁsh species, as well as ﬁsh species richness and diversity, but had negligible cascading trophic effects on the biomass of zoo- and
phytoplankton. Obviously, caution has to be taken when comparing the lakes with and without tucunare ´, as it is impossible to be sure about the causality. If, for example, the invaded lakes were already more disturbed than the non-invaded lakes, this could facilitate successful tucunare ´ invasion (the concept of invader species being ‘drivers’ or ‘passengers’; MacDougall and Turkington 2005). All lakes in our study, invaded and non-invaded, are, however, relatively pristine and do not suffer from human habitat destruction, fragmentation and diversion of water, exploitation (overﬁshing) and water pollution, which makes this alternative hypothesis unlikely. Another possible explanation for the difference in communities between invaded and non-invaded lakes could be that the invaded lakes were already relatively species poor and thereby susceptible to successful invasion by tucunare ´. If so, tucunare ´ would not be the driver but the result of low species diversity
(diversity-invasibility hypothesis; Meiners and Cadenasso 2005). However, earlier studies have indicated that tucunare ´ introduction had negative effects on native ﬁsh communities in environments where it was formerly absent (Zaret and Paine 1973; Latini and Petrere 2004; Pinto-Coelho et al. 2008; Pelicice and Agostinho 2009). Moreover, previous inventories of the ﬁsh population in one of our study lakes, Lake Redonda, document local species extinction of Metynnis cf. roosevelt, Astyanax bimaculatus, Cheirodon sp., and Crenicichla lepidota, Cichlasoma bimaculatum, and possibly of Hoplias malabaricus, after tucunare ´ introduction between 1989 and 1990 (Molina et al. 1996) (Table 1). Fifteen years later, two species disappearing immediately upon the tucunare ´ introduction, Metynnis cf. lippincottianus and Hoplias malabaricus, co-occured with tucunare ´ in the lake, while the other species remained absent. We do not know how the two previously extinct species reestablished themselves in the lake, but possibly Metynnis cf. lippincottianus avoided regional extinction due to its large body size (9.95 ± 3.84 cm). Predatory ﬁsh such as tucunare ´ are gape-limited and
cannot efﬁciently prey on large individuals. The disappearance of Hoplias malabaricus, a voracious predator itself, was likely not caused by tucunare ´ predation on adults, but may reﬂect competition or tucunare ´ predation on juveniles. The ambush behavior and strong territoriality of Hoplias malabaricus due to parental care (Paiva 1974) may have prevented their total extinction. Our results concurred with this hypothesis and showed that there was no difference (P[0.05) in H. malabaricus CPUE between lakes with (0.02 ± 0.008 ind m-2) and without (0.02 ± 0.006ind m-2)tucunare ´,indicatingthatthisspeciesmay nothavebeennegativelyaffectedbytheexoticpiscivore. Althoughwefoundtwootherexoticspeciesintwoofthe lakes with tucunare ´ (Oreochromis niloticus in Lake Boa A ´gua and Astronotus ocellatus in Lake Redonda), they are unlikely to have had any effect on the native ﬁsh species due to their very low abundance (1 individual caught of each species). Changes in ﬁsh communities, triggered by piscivorous ﬁsh such as tucunare ´, can have cascading effects on the phytoplankton biomass and primary production in lakes (Carpenter and Kitchell 1993). However, not all cascades propagate to lower
trophic levels or have signiﬁcant impacts on ecosystem processes (Jeppesen et al. 2003), which is supported by our results. Zooplankton biomass and the TZOO: TPHYTOratiotendedtobe higherinlakeswithtucunare ´ and, in accordance with this, we found a marginally signiﬁcant lower total biovolume of phytoplankton (P = 0.051). The relatively weak cascading effect may reﬂectthatphytoplanktonwasstronglynutrientlimitedas indicated by low nitrogen concentrations. Similarly, Jeppesen et al. (2003) found little cascading effect of ﬁsh presence on phytoplankton in oligotrophic lakes in Greenland, while ﬁsh had strong cascading effects in eutrophic temperate lakes. In addition, omnivory is a widespread phenomenon in ﬁsh of shallow tropical lakes (Lazzaro 1997; Jeppesen et al.2010) and their feeding in the littoral-benthic zone tends to diminish the pelagic coupling effects observed elsewhere (Schindler and Scheuerell 2002; Vadeboncoeur et al. 2002; Bertolo et al. 2005). However, despite insigniﬁcant differences in phytoplankton biomass and CHLA, we found higher Secchi depths in lakes with tucunare ´, probably reﬂecting lower physical-induced sediment resuspension as lake depth was lower in these lakes. Overall, our results suggest that tucunare ´ introduction in the coastal lakes of Rio Grande do Norte had a negative impact on the native ﬁsh species by reducing ﬁsh abundance and species diversity. However, as only a weak cascading effect was observed at lower trophic levels, the impacts of tucunare ´ appear to be mainly restricted to the ﬁsh community. Introduction of piscivorous species like tucunare ´ poses a serious threat to ﬁsh diversity in continental aquatic ecosystems and it is therefore urgent to ensure that aquatic management programs do not include new introductions.

