xabstract
1. The issue of freshwater species being threatened by invasion has become central in conservation biology because inland waters exhibit the highest species richness per unit area, but apparently have the highest extinctions rates on the planet. 2. In this article, we evaluated the effects of an exotic, invasive aquatic grass (Urochloa subquadripara – tropical signalgrass) on the diversity and assemblage composition of native macrophytes in four Neotropical water bodies (two reservoirs and two lakes). Species cover was assessed in quadrats, and plant biomass was measured in further quadrats, located in sites where tropical signalgrass dominated (D quadrats) and sites where it was not dominant or entirely absent (ND quadrats). The effects of tropical signalgrass on macrophyte species richness, Shannon diversity and number of macrophyte life forms (a surrogate of functional richness) were assessed through regressions, and composition was assessed with a DCA. The effects of tropical signalgrass biomass on the likelihood of occurrence of speciﬁc macrophyte life forms were assessed through logistic regression. 3. Tropical signalgrass had a negative effect on macrophyte richness and Shannon and functional diversity, and also influenced assemblage composition. Emergent, rooted with floating stems and rooted submersed species were negatively affected by tropical signalgrass, while the occurrence of free-floating species was positively affected. 4. Our results suggest that competition with emergent species and reduction of underwater radiation, which reduces the number of submersed species, counteract facilitation of free-floating species, contributing to a decrease in plant diversity. In addition, homogenisation of plant assemblages shows that tropical signalgrass reduces the beta diversity in the macrophyte community. 5. Although our results were obtained at fine spatial scales, they are cause for concern because macrophytes are an important part of freshwater diversity.

xintroduction
The present global threat to biodiversity has several origins, including habitat destruction, pollution and species introduction. Species introductions have been considered the main cause of extinctions (Clavero & Garcı ´a-Berthou,2005),althoughthecausalrelationship
is dubious because introductions usually occur in conjunction with other stressors (e.g. Byers, 2002; Douglas & O’Connor, 2003). Concern about species introductions is not new: Darwin considered the importance of this process on changing native ﬂora and fauna (Darwin, 1934). The present rate of species introductions is several orders of magnitude greater than values indicated by the fossil record, the increase being largely attributed to human activities (Ricciardi, 2007). Freshwater ecosystems are important for biodiversity. Although they cover only 0.01% of the earth’s surface, these freshwaters contain 9.5% of the total number of species (Balian et al., 2008) and have the highest extinction rates (Jenkins, 2003). This high biodiversity may be explained in part by the presence of macrophytes, which increase habitat complexity at different spatial scales in littoral zones and have positive effects on the taxonomic (Bonecker, LansacToha & Rossa, 1998; Pott & Pott, 2000; Vieira et al., 2007; Pelicice, Thomaz & Agostinho, 2008) and functional diversity (Heino, 2008) of other assemblages. In addition, macrophyte diversity is important for the maintenance of ecological processes (Engelhardt & Ritchie, 2001), which can change when exotic species displace natives (e.g. Urban, Titus & Zhu, 2006). Macrophytes have adaptations that enable fast dispersal and growth, which leads certain species to become very successful invaders (Pieterse & Murphy, 1990; Santamaria, 2002). Thus, some species of macrophyte are potentially invasive (Pieterse & Murphy, 1990) and then can compromise biodiversity and ecosystem processes in lentic and lotic freshwater ecosystems. In general, the most successful macrophyte invaders are native to the tropics, but can be troublesome more widely (e.g. Pieterse & Murphy, 1990). Among the most problematic invaders are the rooted submersed Egeria densa Planch., Myriophyllum aquaticum (Vell.) Verdc. and Hydrilla verticillata (L.f.) Royle; the free-ﬂoating Eichhornia crassipes (Mart.) Solms and Salvinia spp; and the emergents Polygonum spp and Typha spp, in addition to several grasses (e.g. Pieterse & Murphy, 1990; Pott & Pott, 2000; Finlayson, 2005; Ali & Soltan, 2006). Changes in natural assemblages caused by these and other invasive species have been reported for several ecosystems (e.g. Pott & Pott, 2003; Finlayson, 2005; Ali & Soltan, 2006; Urban et al., 2006).
In addition to changing species composition and reduced plant diversity, fast growing of exotic invasive macrophytes may also affect the functional diversity of aquatic vegetation. The mechanism behind decreases in taxonomic and functional richness could, for example, involve competition (Scheffer et al., 2003; Milne, Lang & Murphy, 2007; Mony et al., 2007). However, an increase in functional diversity is also possible through facilitation, as suggested for Eichhornia azurea Kunth, whose long ﬂoating stems provide protection against wind and waves for freeﬂoating species (Boschilia, Oliveira & Thomaz, 2008; Marques-Silva & Thomaz, 2009) and for H. verticillata that reduce turbidity and facilitates the spread of native submersed plants (Rybicki & Landwehr, 2007). Unlike northern temperate regions, native species (e.g. Egeria densa and Eichhornia crassipes) are considered the main nuisance plants in Neotropical regions (Pieterse & Murphy, 1990; Martins et al., 2008; Pitelli et al., 2008). However, recent studies show a progressive occurrence of exotic species, with increased potential to become invaders in both natural and artiﬁcial (i.e. reservoir) aquatic ecosystems. Two exotic species are of particular concern: the rooted submersed Hydrilla verticillata (recently recorded in the Upper Parana ´ River basin; Thomaz et al., 2009a) and the grass Urochloa subquadripara (Trin.) R.D.Webster (syn. Brachiaria subquadripara (Trin.) Hitchc., Brachiaria arrecta (Hack.) Stent.), commonly known as tropical signalgrass (Teuton et al., 2004), and also as tanner grass. Urochloa subquadripara, native to Africa, is a rooted plant with long ﬂoating stems and emergent leaves and has been recorded in high frequencies and biomass in both lakes and reservoirs (e.g. Pott & Pott, 2003; Martins et al., 2008; Thomaz et al., 2009b). There are indications that this species (together with Panicum repens L., native to Australia) is already compromising the diversity of water bodies in the Pantanal (one of the largest wetlands in the world) because it can outcompete native ﬂora (Pott & Pott, 2003). Although the potential effects of invasions by macrophytes are relatively well described in other continents (e.g. Barrat-Segretain, 2001; Finlayson, 2005; Ali & Soltan, 2006; Mony et al., 2007), rigorous comparisons between invaded and non-invaded sites are still lacking in the Neotropics. By using data obtained at ﬁne spatial scales (1 m2 quadrats) in four subtropical aquatic ecosystems (two reservoirs and
two natural lakes), we tested the hypothesis that tropical signalgrass reduces macrophyte taxonomic and functional diversity and changes the composition of macrophyte assemblages. We also evaluated the effects of tropical signalgrass in homogenising plant assemblages and on the likelihood of occurrence of each macrophyte life form.

xmethods
Study area
Sampling was carried out in two large reservoirs (Itaipu, surface area 1,350 km2; Rosana, 350 km2) and
two small shallow natural lakes (areas <2 km2) (Fig. 1). We surveyed four arms of the Itaipu Reservoir, located on the eastern (Brazilian) shore (between 2439¢55.61¢¢S 54 17¢56.28¢¢W – 24 40¢59.72¢¢S 5411¢37.35¢¢W and 2513¢58.19¢¢S 54 25¢2.24¢¢W– 2513¢28.32¢¢S 54 16¢16.03¢¢W), and three arms of the Rosana Reservoir (between 2233¢37.94¢¢S 5248¢48.09¢¢W – 22 34¢11.63¢¢S 52 45¢2.07¢¢W and 2237¢29.07¢¢S 52 51¢3.00¢¢W – 22 40¢5.37¢¢S 52 46¢ 46.46¢¢W). One lake (‘Lake 1’) is located in the alluvial plain of the Parana ´ River (2245¢24¢¢S 53 23¢28¢¢W) and connected to the river through a network of channels. The other lake (‘Lake 2’) is located in the Taquaruc¸u Geomorphic Unit, 30 km away from the main channel
of the Parana ´ River (2226¢25¢¢S 53 19¢2¢¢W); it is no longer inﬂuenced by the river (Fig. 1).
Sampling
Our sampling was carried out between March and September 2008, using a 1 m2 (1 · 1 m) quadrat in 14 patches of macrophytes in the Itaipu Reservoir, 13 in the Rosana Reservoir, nine in Lake 1 and seven in Lake 2. The water depth does not ﬂuctuate greatly in the reservoirs (<1.0 m year)1) or in Lake 2, but is more variable in Lake 1 (2 m year)1), because it is located in a ﬂoodplain. In each patch, we surveyed the vegetation inside two quadrats (except for one patch in Itaipu, where we assessed three quadrats), one dominated by tropical signalgrass (‘D quadrat’) and another where this species was not dominant or absent (‘ND quadrat’), totalling 87 quadrats in 43 patches of macrophytes. We deﬁned D quadrats as those where tropical signalgrass was visually dominant (>50% cover) and had more than 50% of the total biomass, conﬁrmed later in the laboratory (see later) and ND quadrats had less than 50% cover and 50% of total biomass. Because depth affects macrophyte zonation in the littoral (Sculthorpe, 1967), D and ND quadrats were positioned at similar depths in each patch (depths varying from 0.3 to 2.4 m; mean = 0.96; SD = 0.46). This range was chosen because it is typical of sites where tropical signalgrass occurs, and also where most species of native macrophytes are found. Submersed plants were surveyed with a rake. In this case, species percentages were estimated by the frequency of occurrence (plants presence⁄absence on each raking) on rakings undertaken in 1 m2 sampling unit. Macrophytes that could not be identiﬁed in the ﬁeld were collected and preserved as herbarium samples for subsequent identiﬁcation (Kissman, 1997; Lorenzi, 2000; Pott & Pott, 2000), in the Herbarium of the University of Maringa ´ (HUEM). The biomass of macrophytes was also measured in additional samples made with a 0.25 m2 quadrat (0.5 · 0.5 m), positioned in the centre of each 1 m2 quadrat. Plants inside the smaller quadrat were collected manually; a rake was used for submersed species. The plant material was washed carefully with lake water and dried in an oven at 80 C to constant mass. The biomass of some species was insufﬁcient to be detected, so they were assigned a value of 0.01 g. A
few species not recorded in the 1 m2 ﬁeld were found during separation of the material collected in the 0.25 m2. We attributed an arbitrary cover value of 1% to such species. This is the same value we used for rare species (in terms of cover) found in the ﬁeld. In addition to native species richness (number of species per m2; SR), we also evaluated the diversity of functional groups of macrophytes. A possible approach for this is to use habitat trait groups (see Heino, 2008 for an application of this approach to invertebrates), because their importance to ecosystem processes is related to how and where organisms obtain resources (Covich, Palmer & Crowl, 1999; Heino, 2008). In macrophytes, such traits could easily be associated with different life forms because each one colonises and uses water and sediment resources quite differently. In fact, different life forms occupy distinct positions in the water column (e.g. freeﬂoating, submersed, emergent), have different access to light (underwater and⁄or above-water) and nutrients (sediment and⁄or water column). Thus, macrophyte life forms were used as a surrogate of functional groups. For this purpose, macrophytes were separated into the following nine life forms (functional groups): emergent (e.g. Polygonum spp), free-ﬂoating (e.g. Salvinia spp), rooted ﬂoating leaved (e.g. Nymphaea amazonum Mart. & Zucc.), rooted submersed, canopy-forming ‘eloideids’ (e.g. Egeria spp), rooted submersed, creeper-like plants, ‘isoetids’ (e.g. Bacopa sp), free submersed (e.g. Utricularia foliosa L.), rooted with long stems, roots in the nodes and emergent leaves (e.g. Eichhornia azurea), epiphytes (e.g. Oxycaryum cubense (Poepp. & Kunth) Lye) and lianas (e.g. Cucurbitaceae). Following Heino (2008), we will refer to the number of functional groups per m2 as the functional richness (FR).
Data analyses
The two reservoirs differ from the lakes because they are artiﬁcial, younger and deeper. Thus, all analyses (except for logistic regressions) were performed separately for the two types. We ﬁrst applied cumulative curves (Program EstimateS; Colwell, 1997) to compare the number of species in D quadrats with the number of species in ND quadrats. Curves were estimated by randomisation, and quadrats were used as sampling units.
Values of native macrophytes biomass (obtained in the 0.25 m2) were used to estimate diversity (Shannon index; H’). The relationship between tropical signalgrass biomass and SR, H’ or FR was obtained by regressing the last three variables against the ﬁrst. A signiﬁcantly negative slope was interpreted indicating a negative effect of tropical signalgrass on native macrophyte richness. To examine the relationship between SR and FR, we applied a Pearson correlation analysis. A detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) was employed to summarise biological data (Hill & Gauch, 1980). DCA is a multivariate ordination technique used to explore any underlying spatial or temporal gradient in species composition. It allowed us to visualise macrophyte community changes according to the presence of tropical signalgrass. A matrix containing the species incidence (presence⁄absence) data per m2 was used in this analysis, to eliminate the effect of signalgrass biomass, since D quadrats were selected a priori as those dominated by this grass. The scores of DCA were calculated using PC-Ord software version 4.1 (McCune & Mefford, 1999). Changes in macrophyte composition caused by tropical signalgrass were evaluated using three approaches. First, we analysed the biplot with the scores of the two ﬁrst DCA axes separating the D and ND quadrats. Then, we applied a factorial ANOVA ANOVA to the scores of the two ﬁrst DCA axes, considering dominance by tropical signalgrass and lakes (or reservoirs) as factors. With this analysis, we tested whether D quadrats differed from ND quadrats and whether the two lakes (or reservoirs) differed from each other, as well as the interactions between these two factors. Finally,weusedthestandarddeviation(SD)oftheﬁrst
DCA axis to examine whether tropical signalgrass homogenises the macrophyte assemblage (i.e. makes the composition of quadrats more similar). We applied a logistic regression (Ter Braak & Looman, 1986) to test whether the likelihood of occurrence of emergent, free-ﬂoating, rooted with ﬂoating stems, epiphytes, root-submersed (canopyforming) and free submersed traits was affected by tropical signalgrass. It was not possible to analyse rooted ﬂoating-leaved, creeper-like plants and lianas because of the low number of sites at which they occurred (<10). A logistic regression model was the best choice for analysing our dataset because of the characteristics of the dependent variables (binary, or presence, absence), which were regressed on an explanatory (quantitative) variable (biomass of tropical signalgrass). For this analysis, we considered the presence (1) or absence (0) of each life form. The total dataset was used, but Lake 2 was excluded from analyses for root-submersed (canopy-forming) macrophytes because plants belonging to this life form were absent.

xresults
Intotal,werecorded65speciesofmacrophyte:31inthe Itaipu Reservoir, 25 in the Rosana Reservoir, 35 in the Lake 1 and 13 in the Lake 2. The functional group of emergents predominated (41 species), while lianas had the lowest number of species (one). The cumulative species curves approached an asymptote in the Itaipu Reservoir (D quadrats) and in Lake 2 (D quadrats) (Fig. 2a,b). In all four systems, the lowest number of specieswasfoundinthe Dquadrats (Fig. 2). Tropical signalgrass affected different aspects of macrophyte diversity in the four water bodies
analysed. Species richness was negatively inﬂuenced by the biomass of this grass (Linear regression; )0.68 < r < )0.50; 0.002 < P < 0.01) (Fig. 3a,b). Shannon diversity was also negatively and signiﬁcantly correlated with tropical signalgrass biomass (Linear regression; )0.94 < r < )0.48; P < 0.05) (Fig. 3c,d). Functional richness decreased signiﬁcantly with tropical signalgrass biomass ()0.82 < r < )0.53; P < 0.001) (Fig. 3e,f). Finally, and as expected, FR increased with SR, and both variables were highly and signiﬁcantly correlated (0.66 < r < 0.93; P < 0.003; data not shown). The ordination of quadrats using the two ﬁrst DCA axes and the species contributing to them are shown in Fig. 4. The scores of the second DCA axis of D and
ND quadrats differed signiﬁcantly within reservoirs (F = 10.06; P = 0.003), which shows that signalgrass affected the composition of macrophyte assemblages in both reservoirs. There was signiﬁcant difference between the scores of the second DCA axis between the two reservoirs (F = 17.97; P < 0.001). The interaction between reservoirs and the presence of tropical signalgrass were not signiﬁcant (F = 0.09; P = 0.76). Tropical signalgrass also affected macrophyte composition in both lakes, as demonstrated by signiﬁcant differences between the scores of the ﬁrst DCA axis (F = 25.10; P < 0.001). The effect of ‘lake’ (F = 362.20; P < 0.001) was signiﬁcant but the interaction was not signiﬁcant (F = 2.70; P = 0.109). The effects of tropical signalgrass, the type of environment (reservoirs or
lakes) and the interaction term were not signiﬁcant (P > 0.05) for the scores of Axis 1 for reservoirs and Axis 2 for lakes. In the reservoirs, the principal species contributing negatively to Axis 1 and positively to Axis 2 were Paspalum repens P.J. Bergius, while Chara sp, Hydrilla verticillata,Nymphoidesindica(L.)Kuntze,Nitellaspand E. minima contributed positively to Axis 1. Utricularia foliosa and Typha sp contributed negatively to both Axes 1 and Axes 2 (Fig. 4b). In the lakes, Eleocharis sp, Utricularia cf. myriocista A. St.-Hil. & Girard, Fuirena sp and Pontederiatriﬂora (Seub.) G. Agostini, D. Vela ´squez & Vela ´squez contributed positively to Axis 1. Cyperaceae spp, Alternanthera sp and Ludwigia cf. peruviana (L.) H. Hara contributed negatively to Axis 1 and positively to Axis 2, while Cucurbitaceae and
Polygonum stelligerum Cham. contributed negatively to Axes1and2(Fig. 4d). In addition to changing composition, tropical signalgrass increased slightly the similarity of the macrophyte assemblages. This can be seen by the dispersion of sampling stations in the DCA, but was also measured by the standard deviation of the scores of DCA Axis 1 as an indicator of heterogeneity (SD in reservoirs: 67 and 154 for D and ND quadrats, respectively; SD in lakes: 126 and 147 for D and ND quadrats, respectively). Logistic regression analyses showed that tropical signalgrass had different effects on macrophytes depending on their life form (Table 1). The likelihood of occurrence of emergent, rooted with ﬂoating stems and rooted-submersed canopy-forming species was
negatively and signiﬁcantly affected by tropical signalgrass biomass (Table 1; Fig. 5). On the other hand, the likelihood of occurrence of free-ﬂoating and epiphyte species increased signiﬁcantly with tropical signalgrass biomass (Table 1; Fig. 5). Finally, the likelihood of occurrence of free-submersed species were unaffected by tropical signalgrass biomass (Table 1; Fig. 5).

xdiscussion
Tropicalsignalgrasswasfrequent(78outof87quadrats contained tropical signalgrass) and abundant (biomass up to 498 g DW m)2) in the four water bodies we surveyed. This species is widespread in Brazilian
inland waters and is usually recorded in natural lakes (Pott & Pott, 2003), covering large areas in the littoral zones of streams and rivers (S. M. Thomaz, unpubl. data) and particularly in reservoirs, where it is among the most important macrophyte (Martins et al., 2008; Pitelli et al., 2008; Thomaz et al., 2009b). The cumulative curves showed that the number of native species per m2 was always higher where tropical signalgrass was not dominant or absent, but this was particularly evident at the Itaipu Reservoir, where an asymptote was reached for the D quadrats (Fig. 2). The greater reduction of species richness in Itaipu, than in Rosana Reservoir may be attributable to the difference in community composition: the former had eight rooted and six emergent species found infrequently (less than ﬁve quadrats) and none of them co-occurred with tropical signalgrass. Anthropogenic alterations can break natural barriers against invasion and facilitate colonisation by exotic species (Elton, 1958; Havel, Lee & Zanden, 2005). The construction of reservoirs, for example, has been considered within this context because they may reduce ﬂood disturbances; thus, these ecosystems are considered to increase the probability of success of exotic species (Havel et al., 2005). The higher effects of tropical signalgrass on native species in Itaipu, and its wide distribution in other Neotropical reservoirs (Martins et al., 2008; Pitelli et al., 2008; Thomaz et al., 2009b), together with unsuccessful colonisation in native habitats subject to ﬂoods (Thomaz et al., 2009a), may support this view. The reduction of native species associated with tropical signalgrass, as indicated by the species accumulation curves, was conﬁrmed by other analy
ses of different aspects of macrophyte diversity in the four water bodies analysed. These showed that the biomass of tropical signalgrass was negatively related to SR, H’ and FR (Fig. 3). Thus, our results strongly suggest that this exotic grass has a negative impact on the diversity of native macrophytes, at least at ﬁne spatial scales (1 m2 quadrats). The effects of exotics on native species have been found for various groups of aquatic organisms (e.g. Fugi, Luz-Agostinho & Agostinho, 2008), including macrophytes (Barrat-Segretain, 2001; Pott & Pott, 2003; Finlayson, 2005). The probable causes of the negative impacts on macrophyte diversity measured in our investigation are numerous and, although it is not possible to reach deﬁnitive conclusions with our approach, we can infer some possible explanations. Competition with other species of macrophyte may be important, as shown by others (e.g. Grace & Wetzel, 1981; Milne et al., 2007; Mony et al., 2007). Competition is indicated by the strong effect of tropical signalgrass on the likelihood of occurrence of emergent species, rooted with ﬂoating stems and rooted submersed canopy-forming species in our work (see Table 1). At least for this last life form, reduction of underwater light might be important, because tropical signalgrass forms dense ﬂoating mats over the water column. However, allelopathy cannot be discarded, because it has been suggested for many species of macrophytes (Yakimowski, Hager & Eckert, 2005; Ali & Soltan, 2006). Inverse correlations between native and exotic species of macrophytes, such as these we found, are not always recorded. Conversely, both groups of species may increase together in certain circumstances (e.g. Capers et al., 2007; Rybicki & Landwehr, 2007; Thomaz et al., 2009b). These results are usually found at coarser spatial scales (unlike ours, at a much ﬁner, 1m 2 scale) and may be explained by similar responses of native and exotic species to environmental conditions (Levine, 2000; Capers et al., 2007; Thomaz et al., 2009b) or to habitat diversity (Lonsdale, 1999), which is important only at coarser spatial scales. It is worth noting that, in addition to reducing SR and H’, the biomass of tropical signalgrass also negatively affected FR, measured as the number of life forms (a surrogate of the plant functional diversity or habitat trait groups). This is caused by a reduction in the occurrence of emergent, rooted with ﬂoating stems and rooted-submersed canopy-forming life
forms, as demonstrated by logistic regression. Because of heterogeneity in structure or architecture, a mixture of different life forms provides a higher overall habitat heterogeneity, which is considered as one of the main determinants of invertebrate and ﬁsh diversity in littoral zones (Bonecker et al., 1998; Souza-Franco & Takeda, 2000; Vieira et al., 2007; Pelicice et al., 2008). Thus, we suppose that the reduction of FR caused by tropical signalgrass may also have negative consequences for organisms higher in the food web, probably reducing their density and diversity. However, it is also worth noting that, although tropical signalgrass reduced the likelihood of occurrence of three life forms, it increased the likelihood of occurrence of ﬂoating-leaved and epiphytes plants (Fig. 5). This may be explained by surface occupancy of tropical signalgrass, which increases physical structure and facilitates anchorage by free-ﬂoating plants and their epiphytes (basically Oxycaryum cubense). Facilitation has been suggested for other Neotropical macrophytes with similar life forms (Boschilia et al., 2008). Thus, although competition may be a reason for the reduction in SR and FR by tropical signalgrass, this species may also facilitate particular traits, such as the free-ﬂoating ones. Functional richness was strongly correlated with SR in both reservoirs and lakes. This signiﬁcant relationship is not surprising, because both measures are probably related to the same environmental factors along extensive gradients (Heino, 2008), such as a gradient provided by exposure to an exotic plant species, as suggested here. Similar responses to the biomass of tropical signalgrass also indicate that both SR and FR are good response variables for assessing the impact of exotic species on native macrophyte assemblages. Changes in SR and FR observed at such ﬁne spatial scales were enough to produce signiﬁcant alterations in native species composition, as demonstrated by the results of the DCA analysis. Another interesting ﬁnding concerning composition was that tropical signalgrass homogenises macrophyte assemblages at ﬁne spatial scales, as indicated by the SD of the ﬁrst DCA axis. Homogenisation of functional diversity by tropical signalgrass was also detected, because an inverse correlation between FR and tropical signalgrass biomass was found (Fig. 3e,f). Our results agree with data showing that recent invasions mediated by humans have homogenised biotas at different spatial
scales, including ecosystems spread widely across the world (Olden, 2006; Ricciardi, 2007). The increased dissimilarity between ND quadrats indicates higher beta diversity where tropical signalgrass is absent or non-dominant and, together with the effects shown for SR, FR and species composition, is the result of high competitive ability of the Poaceae in general, and tropical signalgrass in particular. In summary, our hypothesis that tropical signalgrass reduces macrophyte taxonomic and functional diversity and changes the composition of macrophyte assemblages was not rejected. Tropical signalgrass decreased SR, H’ and FR and changed the composition of macrophyte assemblages considerably in the four ecosystems investigated. In addition, this exotic species increased the similarity (reduced beta diversity) among quadrats. Exclusion of rooted-submersed and emergent plants by competition is likely to be the underlying mechanism. We emphasise that our data were obtained at ﬁne spatial scales; analyses at coarse scales, together with experiments seeking mechanisms for diversity reduction, are still necessary. However, considering the important role of macrophytes in biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services, our data indicate that the rapid spread of tropical signalgrass in the Neotropics is a cause for concern.

