xabstract
Tarebia granifera (Lamarck, 1822) is one of the most widespread alien invasive molluscs around the world
and was accidentally introduced into South Africa via the aquarium trade during the 1990s. It has invaded
and spread in the estuaries and lakes of the iSimangaliso Wetland Park, where it is often present in extremely
high densities. There are no studies directly addressing the impact of T. granifera on benthic fauna of invaded
habitats in South Africa. This study aimed to compile useful historic and current benthic community and
environmental data for a comparison between pre- and post-invasion scenarios involving T. granifera in
the shallow water habitats (depth < 2.6 metres) of different lakes in the iSimangaliso Wetland Park. Results
provide evidence that T. granifera can dominate and thus significantly affect native invertebrate assemblage
composition. Under certain environmental conditions, some native gastropod species can be displaced by
T. granifera. However, T. granifera does not appear to markedly affect the biodiversity of aquatic coastal
ecosystems. This study serves as a baseline for future research. There is a need for empirical approaches,
addressing the extent and specific mechanisms of the ecological impact of T. granifera.

xintroduction
Some successful alien species can become established in a new habitat and produce
large populations, which have the potential to negatively affect native communities
(Lockwood et al. 2007). However, in coastal habitats such as estuaries, alien invasive
species (AIS) do not necessarily threaten biodiversity. Introduced alien species may
even have an additive effect on communities and positively contribute to ecosystem
functioning (Reise et al. 2006).
The ecological effects of AIS tend to be case-specific and data from a variety of
sources and obtained by various techniques are necessary for analysis and detection of
any impacts on native assemblages. However, there are many challenges in the way of
assessing the effects that successful invaders have on native communities. There is often
a lack of pre-impact data in AIS impact studies, but when such information is available,
it can be useful as a baseline for comparison with the current invasion scenario, thus
providing a kind of insight that cannot be gained in any other way.
The iSimangaliso Wetland Park is an UNESCO World Heritage Site in north-eastern
South Africa. The Kosi Lakes, Lake Sibaya and the St Lucia Estuary are Ramsar Wetlands
of International Importance within iSimangaliso (Fig. 1). All of these locations have
recently been invaded by Tarebia granifera (Lamarck, 1822), an alien gastropod that
can reach densities of over 20000 ind.m-2, displace other species, and become a dominant
component of shallow water invertebrate assemblages (Miranda et al. 2011b). T.
granifera is a caenogastropod (Thiaridae), originally from south-east Asia. This aquatic
snail ranges in shell height from 1 to 30 mm. It is parthenogenetic and eu-viviparous,
giving birth to fully developed juveniles. T. granifera has invaded several subtropical
parts of the world (Chaniotis et al. 1980; Karatayev et al. 2009; Lόpez-Lόpez et al.
2009). Although it is regarded as a freshwater species, T. granifera is also pre-adapted to
brackish environments (Miranda et al. 2011b). Populations are essentially composed of
females which reach sexual maturity at a shell height between 6 and 8 mm (Miranda et
al. 2011b). T. granifera was accidentally introduced into South Africa via the aquarium
trade during the 1990s (Appleton & Nadasan 2002) and was discovered for the first
time in the St Lucia Estuary in 2005 (Appleton et al. 2009; Miranda et al. 2010). This
AIS has since spread and invaded different water bodies, including estuaries and lakes,
in the north-eastern areas of South Africa, while its ecological impacts remain largely
unknown (Appleton 2003; De Kock & Wolmarans 2008; Appleton et al. 2009).
Pre-invasion data are available in the literature for different major lakes within
the iSimangaliso Wetland Park. This study addresses the effects of the invasion by
T. granifera on shallow water benthic assemblages. Based on the hypothesis that T.
granifera as well as environmental changes affect macrofaunal assemblage composition
and biodiversity, a pre-invasion scenario, comprising benthic macrofauna abundance
data collected before the introduction of T. granifera into iSimangaliso, is compared
with the recent post-invasion scenario.

xmethods
Data collection
Efforts were made to compile the longest and most complete data set for the different
lakes of iSimangaliso, which could provide information relevant to a comparison between
pre- and post-invasion scenarios involving T. granifera. Benthic communities were
sampled and environmental data collected from a number of sites between 1968 and
2013. Environmental parameters at study localities during different seasons are presented
in Table 1, and details of collection methods and sources are given in Tables S1 and
S2. Unless otherwise indicated, data were collected during quarterly surveys conducted
by the University of KwaZulu-Natal in collaboration with Ezemvelo KwaZulu-Natal
Wildlife as well as during opportunistic sampling trips. Data are from specific shallow
water (depth < 2.6 m) sites at Lake Nhlange (LN), Lake Sibaya (LS), Lake Bhangazi
South (LB) and St Lucia’s South Lake (SL) (Fig. 1). Environmental data such as salinity,
temperature, and dissolved oxygen content were measured with YSI multiprobe
systems (556, 6920 or 6600) at the sediment-water interface. For sediment particle-size
analyses, pre-weighed (dry-weight) sediment was passed through a 2000 mm sieve.
The sediment that passed through this sieve was analysed by a Malvern Analyzer. The
sediments retained by the 2000 mm sieve were weighed and incorporated with the data
obtained from the Malvern Analyzer to determine median particle sizes (phi). Benthic
assemblage data were standardised to ind.m-2 and are assumed to be representative, at
least in a broad sense. Times before and after T. granifera invasion were defined as years
before and after 2001. Analyses were based on 36 taxa, which were identified to the
following levels: 19 to species, 4 to genus, 1 to family, 8 to order, 3 to sub-class and 1 to
class. Taxa were classified in a manner that promotes consistency across the data (Ellis
1985; Terlizzi et al. 2003). In summary, four lakes were sampled before 2001 and then
again later, by which time three of them had been invaded (LN, LS and SL) and one
remained uninvaded (LB). Two of the lakes (LS and SL) have 3 sample sites (replicated
1–3 times), while the other two (LN and LB) have 1 sample site (replicated 3 times).
Statistical analysis
To visualize multivariate patterns, non-metric multidimensional scaling (nMDS)
ordinations were performed using PRIMER v.6.1.15 (Clarke 1993; Clarke & Warwick
2001) on benthic community and environmental data. Bray-Curtis similarity matrices
were calculated on untransformed assemblage data and environmental variables were
normalised to a common scale. PERMANOVA+ v.1.0.5 (Anderson et al. 2008) was
used to test for differences between sites before T. granifera invasion (B), sites invaded
subsequently (AI), and sites that remained uninvaded, despite T. granifera invasion
elsewhere (AU) – the “B/A U/I” fixed term. The different lakes are represented by the
“L” fixed term. The “S(B/A U/I)” random term represents seasons (S) nested in the “B/A
U/I” term. Results were interpreted using a conservative significance level of α = 0.01.
The SIMPER routine (Clarke & Warwick 2001) was used to identify the percentage
contribution that each taxon made to the measures of the Bray-Curtis similarity within
locations, before and after T. granifera invasion. RELATE (Clarke & Warwick 2001) was
used to measure how closely related the assemblage data were to environmental data.
BEST (Clarke & Warwick 2001) was used to determine the combination of environmental
variables that best matched biological patterns.
The DIVERSE function (Clarke 1993; Clarke & Warwick 2001) was used to calculate
the following community parameters (from untransformed data) at each location: taxonomic
richness (S, expressed as total number of taxa), total abundance (N, expressed as
ind.m-2), Shannon Wiener Diversity Index (H', as log base e) and Simpson’s Index (λ).
The same PERMANOVA design as described above was used to analyse these data.

xresults
The mean abundances of key benthic macrofaunal taxa at study localities in the
iSimangaliso Wetland Park before the invasion by T. granifera are presented in
Fig. 2. Each lake had a different composition of key taxa. Lake Nhlange had a community
dominated by polychaetes, chironomid larvae, amphipods and the bivalve Brachidontes
virgiliae (Barnard, 1964). Lake Bhangazi South had a typical freshwater assemblage
dominated by chironomid larvae, oligochaetes, the gastropod Melanoides tuberculata
(Müller, 1774) and the freshwater shrimp Caridina sp. Lake Sibaya was dominated by
oligochaetes, chironomid larvae, amphipods and the tanaid Apseudes digitalis (Brown,
1956). St Lucia’s South Lake was dominated by Assiminea sp., polychaetes, copepods
and amphipods. The mean abundances of key benthic macrofauna at study localities
after the invasion by T. granifera are presented in Fig. 3. T. granifera exhibits extremely
high abundances (> 1000 ind. m-2) and dominates the shallow water benthic assemblages
of Lakes Nhlange, Sibaya and St Lucia’s South Lake. Lake Bhangazi South remains
uninvaded by T. granifera and is dominated by insects and Caridina sp.
Our results reveal wide dispersion structures of benthic assemblage data at different
lakes before T. granifera invasion and at uninvaded sites, whereas invaded sites where
T. granifera is present are tightly aggregated (Fig. 4A). Environmental data also exhibit
a relatively wide dispersion, but no apparent disparate aggregations (Fig. 4B). Benthic
assemblage data are strongly matched with environmental data (RELATE, ρ = 0.312,
p < 0.1 %). There are significant differences between sites before T. granifera invasion
and recently invaded and also uninvaded sites, only in terms of benthic assemblage data
(B/A U/I, Table 2). There are no significant differences between lakes (L) or between the
groups of the interaction factor (B/A U/I × L), in terms of either benthic communities
or environmental data (Table 2). There are, however, significant differences between
seasons (S(B/A U/I)) and also between the groups of interaction factor (S(B/A U/I) × L),
in terms of both benthic communities and environmental data (Table 2).
The following combination of environmental factors provides the best correlation
with benthic assemblage data: salinity, dissolved oxygen content, pH and sediment
particle size (Table 3).
Differences in terms of community structure between localities before T. granifera
invasion are attributable to a wide variety of taxa, such as polychaetes, the bivalve
Brachidontes virgiliae, chironomid larvae, oligochaetes, coleopterans (water beetles)
and the native gastropod Assiminea sp. (Table 4). In Lake Bhangazi, the only lake
that has not yet been invaded, the freshwater shrimp Caridina sp. continues to make
a significant contribution to Bray-Curtis similarities (Table 4). However, at invaded
localities, T. granifera can be the most prevalent taxon, contributing 32.18–99.44 % to
Bray-Curtis similarities (Table 4).
Community parameters (S, N, H' and λ) are presented in Fig. 5. Lake Sibaya appears
to have been the most species rich (S) locality before T. granifera invasion. The highest
abundances (N) were recorded at St Lucia’s South Lake before T. granifera invasion.
The Shannon biodiversity index (H') appears to be generally higher for all localities at
times before T. granifera invasion, whereas the Simpson index (λ) appears to be generally
higher after invasion (Fig. 5). However, our results show no significant differences between
sites before T. granifera invasion and recent invaded or uninvaded sites, in terms
of any community parameters (B/A U/I, Table 5). There are also no significant differences
between lakes (L) or between the groups of the interaction factor (B/A U/I × L) (Table 5)
or between seasons (S(B/A U/I)). However, there were significant differences between
groups of interaction factor (S(B/A U/I) × L) in terms of abundance (N) and Shannon
index (H'), indicating significant variation at that temporal scale between different
groups of sites before invasion (B), after invasion (AI), and also taking into account
sites that were still uninvaded after invasion had taken place elsewhere (AU) (Table 5).

xdiscussion
The current study highlights the numerical dominance of T. granifera over benthic
assemblages in different estuarine and freshwater lakes of the iSimangaliso Wetland
Park (Fig. 3). This AIS is capable of maintaining densities of over 1000 ind.m-2 at invaded
sites. Population numbers do vary and fluctuate, due to variable environmental
conditions which can at times either be favourable or very harsh (Miranda et al.
2011b). This is particularly evident at an invaded site of St Lucia’s South Lake, when
on some occasions extremely high T. granifera densities were recorded, whereas on
other occasions the incursion of seawater had wiped out virtually the entire population
(Miranda et al. 2011b). However, T. granifera always seems to recover and persist
due to its exceptional environmental tolerance and parthenogenetic trait (Miranda et
al. 2010; Miranda et al. 2011b). Interestingly, Lake Bhangazi South does not appear
to have been invaded by T. granifera, possibly because of its unique water chemistry,
particularly its low pH levels (Hart & Appleton 1997). Although a close correlation
between environmental and biological data can be expected, interactions between
alien invasive species and environmental variability are poorly understood and need
to be addressed in future work. Multivariate analyses seem to suggest that T. granifera
may be causing homogenisation across the different coastal lakes of iSimangaliso
(Fig. 4A). However, univariate analyses of community parameters indicate that seasonal
environmental conditions, rather than T. granifera invasion, have a more significant
impact on biodiversity (Table 5).
Some alien gastropod species can successfully invade a wide variety of habitats
and produce very large populations. Two typical examples are the South American
golden apple snail (Pomacea canaliculata Lamarck, 1822), which has spread through
southeastern Asia (Fang et al. 2010), and the New Zealand mud snail (Potamopyrgus
antipodarum Gray, 1843), which has invaded Europe, North America and Australia
(Hall et al. 2003; Alonso & Castro-Díez 2008). Many studies have focused on the
impact that these gastropods have on primary producers. Although T. granifera also has
the potential to have a significant feeding impact (Miranda et al. 2011a), it has often
been reported in the literature as reducing the population densities of native molluscs
(Karatayev et al. 2009; López-López et al. 2009). T. granifera has invaded North and
South America as well as Africa (Abbott 1952; Pointier et al. 2003; Ben-Ami 2006;
Appleton et al. 2009). This species is responsible for the displacement and evident
eradication of several Biomphalaria species and Pachychilus violaceus (Preston, 1911)
in Cuba (Pointier & Jourdane 2000).
In South Africa, the need to document broader implications of the invasion of successful
AIS on native community structure is well known (e.g. Robinson et al. 2007).
Appleton et al. (2009) predicted that T. granifera is likely to alter the structure and
diversity of benthic communities in the habitats it invades. The list of susceptible
invertebrates includes bivalves, odonates (dragonfly nymphs), polychaete worms,
isopods and amphipods, decapod shrimps and crabs, as well as native gastropods
(Appleton et al. 2009). Although the current study cannot provide conclusive support,
it does indicate that T. granifera can significantly affect assemblage composition in
shallow waters. In the invaded site of Lake Nhlange, T. granifera dominates the benthic
assemblage at least during the wet season. Following the invasion by T. granifera, the
entire eastern shore of Lake Sibaya is dominated by this mollusc, as reflected by results
from the three sites sampled in both the wet and dry seasons. Notably, M. tuberculata,
which had been recorded there in the past, is not currently found. Only one of the three
sites in the South Lake of St Lucia was invaded. T. granifera does not dominate the
whole shoreline of South Lake. However, it is present in high abundances at freshwater
seepage points along the eastern shores, together with Assiminea cf. capensis (Bartsch,
1915), a key and often dominant taxon in the St Lucia estuarine lake (see Miranda et
al. 2014 and Perissinoto et al. in press). It is important to note that although samples
were collected in shallow waters, these are very important habitats (Lopez et al. 2006).
Nevertheless, this methodological constraint does not reveal whether native species can
simply be displaced to deeper waters rather than eradicated by T. granifera. Although
M. tuberculata could not be found at Lake Sibaya, it occurs together with T. granifera
at Lake Nhlange, so it is possible that it has been displaced. Indeed, displacement of
M. tuberculata by T. granifera has been previously reported elsewhere (Pointier et al.
1998; López-López et al. 2009; but see Karatayev et al. 2009). There is also evidence
that the displacement mechanism associated with T. granifera is driven by chemical
cues which can affect a variety of native gastropods (Raw et al. 2013).
The current study directly addresses the effects of T. granifera on benthic assemblages
of invaded habitats in South Africa and takes into consideration pre-invasion data.
Ecological impacts can be addressed using analysis of variance, where changes in
the magnitude of single response variables, such as community parameters, can be
compared between putatively impacted locations and unaffected, or control, locations.
This principle has been expanded in the beyond-BACI (before/after – control/impact)
approach (Underwood 1992; Underwood 1993), where data are collected at putatively
impacted and multiple control locations, before and after a given disturbance takes
place. The current study set-up mimics to a large extent a beyond-BACI framework.
However, the data set is composed of data collated from a variety of different sources. The
collection techniques are therefore only very broadly analogous and involve collection in
a haphazard manner and at irregular intervals over time. Although this data set is arguably
the best that could be compiled for the study area, it is not adequately robust. Furthermore,
coastal lakes are inherently variable ecosystems and even studies carried out using the
same methodology, at the same time, and in the same areas within iSimangaliso, have
produced significantly different results (MacKay et al. 2010). This obviously lowers
our confidence in the results. However, the key findings appear to be reasonable and
their interpretation should be taken into account in future studies. Despite its limitations
(Forrest & Taylor 2002), an adapted BACI framework was successfully used to address
AIS impact. In the absence of reliable pre-invasion data, a similar study design adapted
to handle post-invasion data only (see Glasby 1997; Miranda & Perissinotto 2014), can
also be used. These types of studies are descriptive, so the findings cannot be used to
infer what processes caused or are causing differences in faunal assemblages. There
are many potential mechanisms that can result in changes in invertebrate assemblages
exposed to variable environmental conditions or invasive species. More rigorous experimental
designs are necessary to research these mechanisms (e.g. Raw et al. 2013).
Conclusions about the impact of T. granifera on benthic assemblages are beyond the
scope of this work. However, this study does show that T. granifera can dominate and thus
significantly affect native assemblage composition. Seasonal changes in environmental
parameters must be taken into consideration, as they can have overriding effects on
whole communities. Interestingly, T. granifera does not appear to negatively affect the
biodiversity of aquatic coastal ecosystems, so perhaps its effects are additive, as are
the effects of many other invasive species (Reise et al. 2006; Miranda & Perissinotto
2014). Under certain environmental conditions, however, some native gastropod species
do appear to be displaced by T. granifera (see also the biodiversity census of
Perissinotto et al. in press). The characteristic high densities and parthenogenetic trait
of T. granifera ensure its persistence and spread within iSimangaliso. It may thus be
impossible to eradicate this AIS (Miranda et al. 2011b). Further studies and empirical
approaches that investigate the extent and specific mechanisms of the ecological impact
of T. granifera, are needed before management action is considered. This study serves
as a baseline for future research into the effects of T. granifera on benthic assemblages
(see also Miranda & Perissinotto 2014).