xabstract
The aggressive cattail species Typha X glauca and Typha angustifolia have established in wetlands across the Great Lakes region, decreasing native plant diversity and altering environmental conditions. We relied on a parallel study in which 80 years of historical aerial photographs from a large Lake Michigan wetland complex were used to map the spread and determine the age of invasive cattail stands. Floristic, edaphic, and environmental data were collected from plots across an invasion-age gradient. Compared with reference uninvaded sites, litter mass more than doubled within 10 years of invasion (P< 0.001), plant diversity declined by more than 50% within 25 years of invasion (P=0.003), and soil organic depth was more than 29-cm deeper in areas invaded for more than 35 years compared with areas invaded for 10 years or less (P=0.006). These time-dependent changes in plant communities, soil, and environmental conditions fundamentally
alter the structure of invaded wetlands, likely influencing a range of ecosystem services.

xintroduction
Invasive species are a major threat to ecosystems worldwide (Wilcove et al. 1998) as they alter nutrient cycling, disrupt food webs, and decrease biodiversity (Zedler and Kercher 2004). Invasive plants are often more productive and thus produce larger amounts of biomass than native species (Ehrenfeld 2003). As invasive plants competitively exclude native species, this biomass can, over time, change the ecosystems’ soil and microbial characteristics (Ehrenfeld 2003; Angeloni et al.2006). Dominant cattail species in the Upper Midwest region include the exotic Typha angustifolia, the native Typha latifolia, and a hybrid of the two parent species, Typha X glauca (Smith 1987). Recent findingssuggest thatinWestern Great Lakes Region wetlands, the majority of cattails in stands with both parent species are F1 hybrids and hybrids which have backcrossed with their parents or other hybrids (hereafterTypha) (Snow et al. 2010; Travis et al. 2010; Travis et al. 2011). Hybrid cattails, Typha X glauca, are particularly aggressive invaders as they produce large amounts of biomass in the form of dead plant material (litter) due to their large size and high productivity. This litter accumulates, covering the soil surface, altering temperatures, excluding light, and decreasing native plant diversity (Angeloni et al. 2006; Boers et al. 2007; Farrer and Goldberg 2009; Tuchman et al. 2009; Vaccaro et al. 2009). Decomposition of Typha biomass should progressively increase soil organic matter
(SOM). Tuchman et al. (2009) and Lishawa et al. (2010) found decreases in species richness and water depth and increases in litter biomass and SOM where Typha had invaded. Over time, these changes to the native plant community and soil are likely to alter ecosystem services, such as denitrification (Windham and Ehrenfeld 2003; Angeloni et al. 2006). While it is clear that Typha impacts wetland ecosystems, the ecological effects of Typha over long time periods (i.e. >30 years) have not been thoroughly explored. Many studies of species invasions focus on the impacts to native species without regard to how long an invader has been present (Strayer et al. 2006). After establishment, an invasive species can acclimate, evolve, and significantly change its surrounding environment (Strayer et al. 2006). For instance, one study of temporal invasion dynamics found more severe impacts to soil properties and ecosystem services due to biomass accumulation in older Acacia longifolia stands compared to both native and recently invaded areas (Marchante et al. 2008). A study of Phragmites australis found live biomass was three times greater in areas invaded for 20 years compared with areas invaded for 5 years (Rooth et al. 2003). Results of these studies indicate that temporal changes do occur and should be incorporated into invasive-species research. Developing an understanding of how invasive species change their environment over time is a critical component for understanding and managing species invasions. Management of invasive species such as Typha is difficult and costly (Vitousek et al. 1996; Hall and Zedler 2010). Managinglargeareasoflandisespeciallychallenging, as portions of the landscape may have reached an “invasion threshold” where further management is impossible or at least impractical for reasons such as high management costs and severely disturbed habitat (Byers et al. 2002). Quick assessment tools like remote sensing help managers find and assess invasions across large areas (Clewell and Rieger 1997; Byers et al.2002). Paired with remote sensing, an understanding of invasion timelines can enable managers to determine a site’s invasion state and facilitate strategic selection of appropriate and efficient management responses. The goal of this study was to assess the temporal dynamics of Typha invasion and identify thresholds when significant changes to ecological variables are observed. We hypothesized that the ecological impacts of Typha would increase with time, eventually leading to substantial changes in plant diversity and local hydrology. We tested this hypothesis by measuring plant community and soil characteristics along a Typha-invasion chronosequence with nearby uninvaded sites. We predicted that: 1) shortly after Typha invasion, plant species richness and diversity would
significantly decline; 2) over the short-term, as Typha density increased, so would the accumulation of biomass in the form of litter; 3) in the medium-term, the accumulated biomass would decompose and incorporate into the soil, increasing concentrations of SOM and depth of the organic matter layer; and 4) in the long-term, increases in organic matter (OM) would elevate the marsh surface, leading to lower water levels and increasingly terrestrial habitats.

xmethods
Study Area and Experimental Design
Research was conducted along the Illinois-Wisconsin border on the coast of Lake Michigan (Fig. 1) in Chiwaukee Prairie and Illinois Beach State Park. Together with Spring Bluff, these protected lands cover more than 2,357 ha (Epstein et al. 2002), much of which is wetland. The study area is a dune and swale complex (Albert et al. 2005) comprised of dune, oak savannah, sedge meadow, calcareous fen, as well as dry and wet prairie communities (SWRPC 1985). The hybrid T. X glauca was discovered in the Illinois Beach State Park study site in 1912 (Gates 1912) and is now one of the most aggressive invaders in the region (Frieswyk and Zedler 2007). In a parallel study, Lishawa et al. (unpublished) determined the age of Typha stands throughout the Illinois Beach dune and swale complex. Historical aerial photographs dating back to the 1930’s were obtained for photo interpretation. The presence and location of Typha in current images was determined from field data, and the characteristic shape, color, and texture of sites invaded by Typha were used as models for delineating historical Typha patches. A trained interpreter delineated Typha patches in each historical aerial photograph, beginning with the most recent, to determine the location and size of Typha stands in each photo at each time period throughout the wetland complex. It is very likely that the species represented in our studysitesareT. X glauca and T. angustifolia since they form very dense monocultures. While there is a possibility that T. latifolia is present as well, we estimate it would be in low densities (see Snow et al. 2010; Travis et al.2010, 2011). Using the Typha stand-age data, we established transects within swales in Chiwaukee Prairie and Illinois Beach that encompassed a range of Typha-stand ages, as well as uninvaded control sites. The control sites were sedge meadow communities dominated by Carex lacustris, Carex aquatilis, andCarex stricta. Environmental conditions within individual swales appeared relatively homogenous, minimizing non-Typha induced variability within transects.
Within each transect, we established waypoints every 5, 10, or 25 m depending on the available area of wetland habitat. As uninvaded parcels were rare or diminished in all of our sites, waypoints in the native zones were spaced closer together than in the much more expansive invaded zones. Waypoints were then paired with Typha stand-age data (Fig. 2). A stratified random sample of field plots covering a broad range of times-since Typha invasion (0–54 years) were selected from the waypoints for detailed analysis. A total of 60 plots were chosen, spread across 5 transects.
Data Collection
Vegetation sampling was performed in late August 2009. Vascular plants within 1-m2 plots were identified to species and the numbers of stems per species was recorded. These data were used to calculate species richness and ShannonWiener diversity. Litter was collected in early May 2009 before new growth emerged. Within 0.25-m2 quadrats adjacent to each plot, all senesced biomass above the fibric organic soil surface was collected, dried for 60 days, and weighed.
Soil organic matter was measured using 10-cm homogenized soil cores taken approximately monthly from plots in Illinois Beach and Chiwaukee Prairie throughout the 2009 growing season. SOM was calculated as the percent of volatile dry mass lost on ignition at 550°C in a muffle furnace (APHA 2005). Organic matter depth was measured from the top of the fibric organic layer to the top of mineral soil using a 1.9-cm diameter galvanized steel pipe. All initial depth measurements were confirmed by taking a soil sample at the intersectionoftheorganicandminerallayersusingasoilcorer. Standing-water depth was recorded from the water surface to the top of the fibric organic layer using a meter stick. Two measurements were taken within each plot. These measurements were taken approximately monthly from plots in Illinois Beach and Chiwaukee Prairie throughout the 2009 growing season. Soil NH4+ concentrations were measured using the phenol-hypochlorite method (Wetzel and Likens 1991) in 10-g soil samples from each plot. These measurements were taken approximately monthly in Illinois Beach and Chiwaukee Prairie throughout the 2009 growing season.
Statistical Analyses
In order to test for differences in Typha stand-age groups, two-way ANOVA, blocking for different transects, were used, followed by Tukey post-hoc tests. Sample sizes for Typha stand age groups including 0 years (native), 10 years or less, 15 to 25 years, and greater than 35 years were 21, 11, 11, and 17 cases, respectively. ANOVA using rank transformations were performed for Typha density, species richness, and Shannon-Wiener diversity as assumptions of normality could not be met for these variables. All univariate statistical analyses were performed using SYSTATstatistical software version 11.0 (SYSTAT Software Inc. 2004).

xresults
Typha density increased significantly within the first 10 years of invasion, and then slowly increased with
increasing age (Fig. 3). The rank-transformed data showed the same patterns as the non rank-transformed data. Litter mass was also significantly greater in all ages of Typha stands than in uninvaded stands, more than doubling within the first 10 years following Typha invasion. Litter mass did not significantly change following the initial increase during the first 10 years of Typha invasion (Fig. 3). Both species richness and Shannon-Wiener diversity significantly declined with increasing age of Typha stands (Fig. 3). However, significant differences in species richness and Shannon-Wiener diversity were not observed until 15 to 25 years after invasion and both continued to decline with increasing age of Typha stands (Fig. 3). Analyses using rank-transformed data confirmed these patterns. Both SOM and OM increased significantly with increasing age of Typha stands. SOM increased by 15% from sites invaded for 10 years or less (mean ± SE=45%±3.1) to sites invaded for at least 35 years (60%±2.6). Unexpectedly, SOM was not greater in sites invaded for more than
35 years (mean ± SE=60%±2.6) compared with uninvaded control sites (47%±3.4; Fig. 3)(P=0.27). The same patterns were found for OM depth. OM depth was >29-cm deeper in sitesinvadedformorethan35yearscomparedtositesinvaded for 10 years or less (Fig. 3). However, no other significant differences were observed. There was a weak difference in NH4+ (P=0.09) and no significant difference in mean water depths (P=0.32) along an age of invasion gradient.

xdiscussion
This study aimed to further our understanding of the ecological impacts of Typha invasions by analyzing the changes over time in ecological characteristics such as plant diversity, litter accumulation, and SOM. Time since invasion was an important component of Typha invasions and was strongly and positively associated with increasing Typha density, litter mass, SOM, and OM depth. However,
some of these environmental changes occurred in less than 10 years following invasion while changes in others took more than 35 years. Significant ecological impacts are shown when they were observed on the timeline in Fig. 4. Increasing litter mass and Typha density were the most rapid changes associated with Typha invasion. However, large changes to species richness and Shannon-Wiener diversity were not observed until 15 years after Typha
establishment, suggesting that litter accumulation may have been a prerequisite for substantial plant-community changes. This underscores growing evidence that litter accumulation is a key driver of plant-community changes associated with Typha invasion (Farrer and Goldberg 2009; Vaccaro et al. 2009; Larkin et al. 2011). Both SOM and OM depth increased with increasing age of Typha stands, providing evidence for decomposition and incorporation of litter mass into the SOM pool and explaining why litter mass did not significantly increase following the initial Typha invasion. Furthermore, both SOM and OM depth increased considerably between newly invaded sites and sites invaded for more than 35 years. These increases followed the accumulation of litter mass, which occurred within the first 10 years following invasion. A delayed increase in SOM and OM depth may have resulted from the relatively slow rate of Typha litter decomposition compared to plant species it displaces (Davis and van der Valk 1978; Freyman 2008). Typha litter decomposition is further delayed by the persistence of standing-dead Typha stems, which remain erect for years following death, preserving senesced Typha litter in an above-ground canopy litter matrix (Davis and van der Valk 1978). Dry conditions in the standing-dead litter prevent rapid decomposition (Su et al. 2007). Eventually, precipitation, snow pack, deer bedding activity, and winds break down the standing-dead litter, compressing it to the moist soil where it can more rapidly decompose and be incorporated into the organic layer (Davis and van der Valk 1978; Welsch and Yavitt 2003). Importantly, the native sites in this study were sedgedominated (Carex lacustris, Carex aquatilis, and Carex stricta). Sedges can accumulate organic matter via dense aboveground tussocks and underground root systems (Brinson et al. 1981; Dwire et al. 2004; Moore et al. 2007). Because we did not measure belowground plant material, we could not differentiate these organic matter inputs. In contrast, in a rush and bulrush-dominated emergent marsh in northern Michigan, Angeloni et al. (2006) saw a four-fold increase in SOM in areas where Typha had established compared to uninvaded areas. Our timeline indicates that land managers should act within the first 10 years following Typha establishment to maintain species diversity before significant declines in habitat are observed. Managers should focus on areas that are newly invaded as the native community will be more readily reestablished in these sites. Managing young invasions would also limit the buildup of organic matter as the stand increases in age. Sites invaded for more than 35 years will require stronger interventions such as flooding (Leeds et al. 2009) or removal of organic material (White et al. 2008) in order to eliminate accumulated organic matter and reestablish the hydrologic regime. Even small hydro
logical changes can further alter habitat (Desgranges et al. 2006) and ecosystem services (see Fisher and Acreman 2004). Sites invaded by Typha for more than 55 years are likely to be drier as organic matter builds up, “terrestrializing” invaded sites (see Kirschner et al. 2001; Rooth et al. 2003, and Buffam et al. 2010). Habitat quality and ecosystem services such as denitrification are likely to decline as the water levels they depend on become lower and wetlands become less wet. Time since invasion is an important component of biological invasions and was strongly linked with the effects of Typha on wetland structure and function. This temporal context must be studied in order to fully understand invasion dynamics (Strayer et al. 2006). Future studies should investigate sites invaded for more than 55 years, as changes to the environment may further alter habitat and ecosystem services. With improvements in the speed and efficiency of invasive stand aging (e.g. quick field assessment tools or remote sensing techniques to recognize plant density and determine an approximate invasive plant stand age), similar invasion timelines could be created for other species invasions resulting in improved landscape-scale management of invasive species.
