xabstract
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of the introduced signal crayfish (Paeifastacus leniuscuhis) and the native noble crawfish {Astaciis astacus) on a benthic lood web. We mimicked the habitat of a pond littoral in 4.5-m- plastic pools stocked with natural densities of macrophytes. invertebrates and either signal crayfish, noble crayfish, or kept as crayfish free controls. After two summer months, all invertebrates and macrophvtes were collected from each pool, and periphvton was sampled on one substratum exposed and two substrata not exposed to crayfish grazing. Samples for stabife isotope analysis of benthos were collected in pools with noble cravfish. '-N ratios showed that crayfish were top consumers, and '^C ratios indicated that they received most of their carbon from invertebrates, but less from primary producers. Cravfish did not affect the biomass of predatorv invertebrates, dominated bv active swimmers among f-leteroptera and Coleoptera. but had a strong impact on grazers dominated bv thin-shelled Lymnaea snails. Hard-shelled Bithynia snails were also reduced in numbers, but the largest of these snails were consumed less than thin-shelled Lymnaea snails. The reduced biomass of snails had an indirect positive effect on periphvton biomass on all three substrata. Cravfish grazed selectively on macrophvtes and reduced the biomass of Cfiara. whereas Elodca was less afTected. The exotic signal cravfish had. overall, a stronger impact on the biomass of macrophytes and grazers than the native noble crayfish. The results indicate that crayfish may structure food webs through consumption from many food levels. The short-term influence of cravfish on other trophic levels depends on crayfish feeding efficiency, food preferences and species-specific consumption rates.

xintroduction
Although omni\or> (predation on more than one ticularly vulnerable to crayfish predation, whereas nontrophic level) is prevalent in natural aquatic food webs, molluscan invertebrates are less affected (Lodge et al. trophic interactions in omnivore rich food v\ebs are not 1994, Perry et al. 1997). Thin-shelled snail species are well studied (Diehl 1993). Freshwater crayfish are im- preferred over thick-shelled species (Alexander and portant omni\ores in many littoral food webs and may Covich 1991). For non-molluscan invertebrates, their influence their structure by consuming macrophytes, availability and swimming performance is likely to afin\ertebrates, periphytic algae and detritus (Lodge et al. feet crayfish predation ef^ficiency, as littoral communi1994, Charlebois and Lamberti 1996, Nystrom et al. ties with abundant cravfish populations are dominated 1996). Despite being omnivores, crayfish are selective b> burrowing and mobile invertebrate taxa not associconsumers. The choice of macrophytes is often deter- ated with macrophytes (Nystrom et al. 1996, Nystrom mined by the structure of the plant, and submerged and Graneli, 1996). Field experiments suggest that the macrophytes are therefore preferred to established, effects of crayfish on the community is complex and emergent plants (Chambers et al. 1991, Nystrom and difficult to predict. Crayfish directly afTect more than Strand 1996). Among the invertebrates, snails are par- one trophic level, but the biomass of invertebrates and
periphyton is also affected indirectly through crayfish reduction of macrophytes (Lodge et al. 1994, Charlebois and Lamberti 1996, Nystrom et al. 1996). Further, crayfish predation on snails may have an indirect positive effect on periphyton biomass (Weber and Lodge 1990, Lodge ct al. 1994). Throughout the world, there are many examples of exotic crayfish species being stocked (Hobbs et al. 1989). For example, introduced American crayfish species have successfully spread throughout Europe, where they have replaced native species by transferring lethal diseases to native species, and by competitive exclusion (Smith and Sodcrhall 1986, Soderback 1995). Although most studied crayfish species appear to have similar food preferences, the strength of the impact of crayfish on food web interactions is species dependent. Experimental studies and field observations suggest that large, fast-growing, exotic crayfish species have a stronger impact on lower trophic levels than native species (Olsen et al. 1991, Nystrom and Strand 1996). Here, we compare experimentally the efTects of the exotic signal crayfish {Pacifastactis lenittsculus) and the native noble crayfish {Astaciis astacus) on a freshwater benthic food web. The signal crayfish is native to north-western North America and is considered a longlived aggressive species with rapid growth and reproduction. Our aim was to test if the introduced signal crayfish has stronger efTects on macrophytes, invertebrates and periphyton than the native noble crayfish, and to compare the relative strengths of direct vs indirect efTects of crayfish on a benthic community. Moreover, can short-term effects of crayfish consumption of macrophytes, periphyton and invertebrates explain the observed long-term efTects in littoral communities with abundant crayfish?

xmethods
General design and experimental set-up
Three treatments, a crayfishless control (C), addition of signal crayfish (S) and addition of noble crayfish (N) were randomly assigned to fifteen outdoor pools, and each treatment was replicated five times. The experiment was conducted during May-August 1996 in southern Sweden. The experimental pools were placed in a pasture surrounded by a small forest. On 13 May, the pools (4.5 m-, 45 cm deep, diameter of 2.4 m) were filled with sediment, originating fYom a small cutrophic lake and mixed with pure sand, to a thickness of 3 cm. The sediment was sun dried for one week before being added to pools to kill macroinvertebrates. The pools were filled with ground water (level 30 cm) and an inoculum of lake water (25 I/pool) together with zooplankton netted fYom the lake. Allochthonous detritus was added as soaked alder and beech leaves (150
g wet mass). To increase habitat complexity and provide shelter to crayfish, 20 plastic pipes (20 cm long, 5 cm in diameter) and 50 smaller pipes (3 cm long, 5 cm in diameter) were added to each pool. Crayfish were stocked on 13 June, and pools were covered with a 2-cm mesh to prevent the crayfish from escaping and to avoid disturbance from birds. Pools were checked twice daily for signs of moulting or dead crayfish. The experiment was terminated two months after the introduction of crayfish.
Crayfish
The densities and size distribution of crayfish used in the experiment were decided based on abundance data lor noble crayfish in the littoral zone of Swedish lakes (Appelberg and Odelstrom 1986). We used a crayfish density that was half the average reported by Appelberg and Odelstrom (1986). but had the same size distribution. In each crayfish pool, we put 4 adult crayfish (2 males and 2 f^emales), 3 two-year-old crayfish, 7 oneyear-old crayfish and 14 young of the year, corresponding to a total density of 6 crayfish m-. The mean carapace lengths (mm + 1 SD) for the three largest size classes of signal crayfish were; 46.0+1.4, 36.0+1.5. 1 7.2 ± 0.9 and for noble crayfish; 44.8 ± 0.6, 36.9 ± 0.9. 17.1 + 0.3. The biomass of crayfish before and afTer the experiment was derived from a carapace length-dry mass regression, calculated separately for both species. All crayfish grew and moulted during the experiment, but the initial total and the final biomass of the signal and noble crayfish were similar (ANOVA. P^ 0.196, P = 0.639. respectively). No dead crayfish were observed during the expenment, but when the experiment was terminated, one three-year-old and one two-yearold signal crayfish was missing fYom two of the pools.
Invertebrates
The types of grazers stocked reflected their density from littoral zones in ponds and lakes in southern Sweden, which are influenced little by crayfish. These benthic communities are dominated by snails, especially thinshcllcd species (Bronmark 1994, Bronmark and Weisner 1996). We stocked 45 individuals of each of two species of thin-shelled snails {Eymnaca stagnalis and I. pcrcgra), 45 individuals of a hard-shelled operculate snail {Bith]nia tentiiculitta). 45 Ganvnarus pulex and 45 Asellus aquatictis into each pool on 15-24 May. Invertebrates were collected fYom nearby ponds and lakes. The size was 20-40 mm for L. stagnalis, 10-15 mm for L. pcregrct and 10 mm for B. tcntacidata. Other invertebrates colonised the pools during the experiment. When the experiment was terminated, all sediment and water in the pools were sieved through a
1-inm mesh, and invertebrates were sorted and frozen. 25 ± 2 ).tg L. and in pools with signal crayfish 24 + 3 After thawing, invertebrates were counted and dry mass )ig I. The concentration of total nitrogen in controls determined (65°C). For snails, the shell-free dry mass was 986+ 104 (.tg I. in pools with noble crayfish 926 ± was estimated from length-mass regressions. 49 ng 1. and in pools vMth signal crayfish 908 ± 156 |ag 1.
Primary producers
On 14 May. we planted 300 g fresh weight of Chat a hispida and 300 g of Elodea eanadensis in each pool. When crayfish were introduced, the macrophytes covered about one third of the pool area. When the experiment was finished the drv mass (65°C) of macrophytes was deteimined To evaluate the effects of direct grazing versus the indirect effects of changes in the abundance of small grazers on periphytic algae, we put three different artificial substrata in the pools on 21 Ma\. In each pool we put four glazed tiles (10 A 10 cm) on the sediment surface (grazed by crayfish and other grazers), four polyethylene strips (1.6 cm wide. 30 cm long, no grazing possible by crayfish) and four plastic macrophyte plants (a mimic of Elodea eatiadetisis. 23 cm high with six branches, no grazing possible bv cravfish). The lower end of each polyethylene strip was anchored, while the top end was buoved bv a small cork. When the experiment was terminated, tiles, strips and plastic Elodea were collected and frozen, as well as the grazers found on these substrata. Chlorophyll a content was measured using ethanol as the extractant (Jespersen and Christoffersen 1987). Before analysis, plastic strips were put in vials, w hereas periphv ton on tiles was scraped off w ith a razor blade and then transferred to vials. PeriphV ton on plastic macrophytes was estimated from three branches, all of the same size. The chlorophyll content on tiles, strips and plastic macrophytes was standardised by expressing chlorophyll content per unit of surface area.
\\ ater chemistry
The ground water used was alkaline (3.3 meqv I). Tetnperature and oxygen saturation were measured weekly at noon in all pools. Temperature did not vary more than 0.5°C between treatments and averaged 17.4°C ( + 1.8 SD. n = l dates). Daytime oxygen saturation was never below lOO'Vii. At the end of the experiment, the concentration of total phosphorus, phosphate and total nitrogen was analysed on a Technicon Auto Analyser II (according to Swedish standards: SS fJ28127. SS 028126. and SS 028131. respectively) and ammonium was analvsed spectrophotometricallv (Chaney and Marbach 1962). Nutrient levels did not differ between treatments (MANOVA. P = 0.127). The concentration of total phosphorus (means ± 1 SD) in controls vvas 29 ± 5 |ig-l. in pools with noble crayfish
Stable isotope analyses
Stable isotope distributions of carbon (o'^'C) and nitrogen (6'~'N) were measured to distinguish between different food sources assimilated by noble crayfish, and to establish the trophic position of the species in the food web. In freshwater benthic food webs, carbon isotopes (o'^'C) reflect assimilated food items, but the trophic enrichment is insignificant (France 1996a). Animals usually have '^C values within + 2"...i of the values of their foods (Peterson et al. 1985). Nitrogen isotope values (5'"'N) have been successfullv' used to define an organism's trophic position (e.g. Michener and Schell 1994). '^N values typically increase by 3%n during each trophic transfer (Minagawa and Wada 1984). depending on the degree of omniv ory. If consumers are omniVores and also assimilate food from two or more levels below, enrichment of '"'N may be lower than + 3%o (Kling et al. 1992. Cabana and Rasmussen 1994. Schlacher and Wooldridge 1996). To meet the biomass requirements for the analyses, we used the most common invertebrate taxa. macrophytes. terrestrial detritus and periphyton from the five pools with noble cravfish. Thus, a specific sample consisted of the pooled material from five replicates. Although pooling of organisms does not reveal information about the variance of isotopic composition between replicates, it can be used to show the average composition of animals at a given time (Rosenfeld and Roff 1992). Material was collected at the end of the experiment, and all invertebrates were allowed to defecate for 6 h before freezing. One strand of each macrophyte species was collected from each pool and thoroughly washed to remove periphv ton and detritus. Periphytic algae vvas collected from one strand of plastic Elodea in each pool. The invertebrate samples consisted of: 50 L. stagnalis. 40 Sototiecta sp.. 115 .Asellus aqiiatieus. 80 Ganimarus pttlex. and 350 Cloeon dipterutn. For analyses of noble crayfish we used 35 one-year-old. 15 two-year-old and 20 three-year-old individuals. Detritus consisted of terrestrial leaves and seeds. .After carbonate removal (1 M HCl). samples were rinsed twice in deionised water, dried at 65°C to constant weight and homogenised (Schlacher and Wooldridge 1996). Eymnaea stagtialis samples consisted of the entire snail tissue. Crayfish samples consisted of dissected abdominal muscles (France 1996b). Measurements of isotope ratios are reported as comparisons with standards (Peedee Belemnite for C and air for N) and expressed as the relative per mil ("•"•) difference between the sample and standards (Kling et al. 1992).
Statistical analyses
We tested for treatment effects on the biomass of invertebrates and macrophytes using one-way ANOVA. Contrasts tested the general effect of crayflsh (S -I- N vs C) and the difference between the two crayflsh species (S vs N). To meet the assumptions of ANOVA (homogeneity of variances and normal distribution of residuals), the total biomass of macrophytes, invertebrate biomasses and chlorophyll data were natural log transformed, whereas proportions were arcsine transformed. When testing the difference between treatments on the biomass of difTerent invertebrate taxa the seqtiential Bonf~erroni technique was applied to adjust 7.. This approach reduces the risk of making a type I error, but maintains enough power to detect more than one significant result (Rice 1989). To evaluate the overall elTects of treatments on the three difTerent periphyton substrata and nutrients (total phosphorus, phosphate, total nitrogen and ammonium), we used a multivariate
analysis of variance (MANOVA). If the MANOVA indicated a difference between treatments, we used untvariate ANOVAs to determine which specific variable accounted for difTerences among treatments in the MANOVA. Standard deviations are given after all mean values in the text and figures.

xresults
Invertebrates
The total biomass of predatory invertebrates was not affected by crayfish (Fig. 1, Table 1). Coleoptera and Heteroptera were the dominating predatory invertebrates in all treatments, and their biomasses did not difTer between treatments (Fig. 2, Table I). Both crayfish species dramatically reduced the total biomass of grazers, with the signal crayfish having a significantly larger impact than the noble crayfish (Fig. 1, Table 1). Gastropods dominated the grazer biomass, and was significantly lower in crayfish pools than in controls, especially when signal crayfish were present (Fig. 2. Table 1). Crayfish also affected the species composition of gastropods. The proportion of hard-shelled Bithynia snails to thin-shelled Lymtutea snails differed between treatments (ANOVA, /*< 0.0001). The proportion of Bithynia snails was highest in pools with crayfish (S: 91'!/,, ±7, N: 67'V;.+ 22) relative to controls (17% ±3, S -h N vs C. P < 0.0001). and pools with signal crayfish had proportionally more Bithynia snails than noble crayfish pools (S vs N, /• = 0.0092). Moreover, Bithynia snails were slightly larger in pools with crayfish (S: 9.7 mm ±0.7, N: 9.8 mm ±0.3) than in controls (8.3 mm ± 1.4, S + N vs C. /> = 0.0120). but were of the same size in signal cray^sh and noble crayfish pools (S vs N, 7^ = 0.892). In contrast, all size classes of the thin-shelled Lytntiaea snails were vulnerable to crayfish
predation. L. peregra was eliminated in some crayfish pools, and the mean size of surviving L. stagnalis in crayfish pools was similar to control pools (ANOVA, 7^ = 0.0923). The biomass of snails collected fYom plastic strips, tiles and plastic macrophytes was reduced in crayfish pools relative to controls (MANOVA, S-hN vs C, /'< 0.0001). There was also a lower biomass of grazing snails on the substrata in pools with signal cray-fish in comparison with noble crayfish (MANOVA, S vs N, P = 0.(J(J23). For non-snail grazers, the biomass of Asellus aquatieiis was lower in pools with crayfish than in controls, the biomass of mayflies (mainly Cloeon dipterum) w as highest in pools with cray fish, and Gammarus pulex and Diptera were unaffected (Table 1, Fig. 2).
greater than in pools with signal crayfish (Fig. 3). There was a significant difTerence among treatments, but the general effect of crayfish on total macrophyte biomass and the difference between signal crayfish and noble crayfish were only marginally significant (Table 1). The impact of crayfish on Chara. but not Elodea was significant (Table 1, Fig. 3). In control pools, the final biomass of Elodea was significantly higher than for Chara (Paired r-test, /^ = 0.0007, Fig. 3). Crayfish had a positive efTect on periphyton growing on tiles, plastic macrophvtes and plastic strips (Table 2. Fig. 4). and this efTect did not difTer between cravfish treatments (MANOVA, S vs N, P = 0.470. Table 2). .Although we did not quantify periphyton species composition, colonies of Coleochaete dominated the tiles in all treatments.
Stable isotope ratios of carbon and nitrogen
Noble crayfish had the highest '-N \alues (10,47'V. ± 0.71. Fig. 5). and these were on average 3.14"i... higher than for the predatory invertebrate Xotonecia sp. Notonecta sp. ( -I- 7.33"VM.) had slightly higher nitrogen values than the invertebrate grazers ( — 5.53'-± 0.60) and the latter slighth higher values than the primarx producers ( —4.26'-^ 1.88). Terrestrial detritus was v\ell separated from primary producers and invertebrates by the lowest '-N content (-0.4":H,). '-C of noble crayfish ( - 23.88"n" ± 0.51) was close to that of invertebrate grazers ( — 23.19' "X 0.50). Primary producers had the highest carbon values ( — 20.87%u ± 0.22). whereas terrestrial detritus had the lowest ( - 28.53'/o),

xdiscussion
Effects on invertebrates
Sedentary lYeshwater prey are usually more vulnerable to actively searching benthic predators than are mobile prey due to higher capture success (e.g. Allen et al. 1987). Crayfish are actively foraging predators, and their capture success is influenced by prey escape (Moore and Williams 1990). As expected, the impact of crayfish on slow moving snails was significant, while there was less influence on active species, such as Coleoptera, Heteroptera and Gammarus. Although many heteropterans taste badly (Scrimshaw and Kerfoot 1987), we believe that the lack of influence of crayfish on these taxa was mainly due to their active behaviour. Field surveys have shown that in the presence of crayfish the invertebrate community is dominated by sediment-dwelling taxa such as Chironomidae and Sicdis sp., and by active swimmers such as Heteroptera and Gatiititarus (Nystrom et al. 1996). In con
D ColilnjI N(jhlc c B Signal crayn.sh
Tiles Strips Plastic macrophytes
Fig. 4. Periphyton biomass as chlorophyll a at the end of the experiment from three different substrates, tiles, plastic strips, and plastic macrophytes. The treatments are control pools without crayfish, pools with noble crayfish, and pools with signal crayfish. Error bars denote 1 SD (/V=5).
trast, the biomass of snails (Lodge et al. 1994, Nystrom et al. 1996, Perry et al. 1997) and the isopod Asellus (Nystrom et al. 1996) was reduced in the presence of crayfish. Several experiments and field studies have shown that crayfish are efficient predators on snails (Olsen et al. 1991. Lodge et al. 1994. 1998). Moreover, thin-shelled snails are more vulnerable to crayfish predation than hard-shelled snails (Alexander and Covich 1991, Lodge et al. 1998). Molluscivorous flsh may also change the species composition of snails from thin-shelled E. stagtialis to thick-shelled species such as B. tetxtaculata (Bronmark and Weisner 1996). In this study, crayfish
fed, and signal crayfish in particular, on all size classes of thin-shelled Eytnnaea snails and eliminated E. peregra completely in some pools. B. tentaeulata. was less affected by crayfish and thus dominated snail biomass in pools with crayfish. The ma>fly Cfoeon dipterutn was positively affected by crayfish. Field surveys have shown that mayflies are abundant in the presence of many signal crayfish (Nystrom and Graneli 1996). We believe that resource-competition with other grazers mav explain their response. Cloeon is an active species probably less affected by crayfish predation. The abundance of predators other than crayfish did not differ between treatments, and the most striking difference was the high abundance of Eytnnaea snails in controls and the amount of periphvton in dilTerent treatments. Cloeon species mainlv consume algae and detritus (Gupta et al. 1994). Periphyton grazing snails can negatively affect the activity, development and reproduction of other grazers (Gresens 1995). The mavflies in our experiment colonised during the experiment, and Cloeoti vvas found in all pools indicating differences in survival between treatments. However. Cloeon mav- have chosen to oviposit in crayfish pools. Some insects, such as ovipositing .Anopheles avoid pools with grazer competitors (i.e. Rana tadpoles: Petranka and Fakhoury. 1991).
Effects on primary producers
Crayfish had the strongest impact on Chara. whereas the impact on Elodea was minor. Several studies suggest that cravfish can affect the abundance and species composition of macrophvtes bv selectivelv feeding on submerged species, especially charophytes (Chambers et al. 1991. Lodge et al. 1994. Nystrom and Strand 1996). The smaller influence of noble and signal cravfish on Elodea mav be due to preference for Chara over Elodea (Nystrom and Strand 1996). As Elodea had a much higher growth rate than Chat a (the final drv weight in controls was about three orders of magnitude higher for Elodea than for Chara). Elodea mav be better able to compensate for grazing effects. The positive indirect effect on periphyton in crayfish pools was likely a consequence of reduced biomass ot grazers and a change in the species composition ot snails. Snails substantialh reduce periphytic microalgae (e.g. Bronmark 1989. Barnese et al. 1990). and for the same animal biomass the grazing rate of B. tetitaeulata. which dominated in crayfish pools, is lower than tor Lytnnaea peregra (Vermaat 1994). which was common in pools without crayfish. The other periphyton grazer declining in crayfish pools was Asellus aquatieus. but its impact on periphyton is low compared to snails (Vermaat 1994). Reduced grazing from snails affected epilithon biomass on tiles more than direct grazing by cravfish. This conclusion is also supported by isotope
ratios because noble crayfish ( — 23.88%..) had lower '^C values than periphyton ( — 20.2"ni.) indicating that periphyton was a less important energy source for these crayfish. In contrast. L. stagtialis ( — 22.8%(i) had higher '^C values than crayfish indicating that periphyton was an important food source, but snails probably also assimilated detritus of terrestrial origin. Similar results v\ere reported by Lodge et al. (1994). who found that Oreoneetes rustieus had an indirect positive effect on periphyton by reducing snail abundance. They suggested that O. rustieus. although eating periphyton. had a low impact on firmlv attached algae. In streams. O. rustieus probablv removed loosely attached periphvton. allowing adnate algal cells to flourish (Charlebois and Lamberti 1996). The periphvton communitv on tiles in our studv vvas dominated bv the prostrate green microalgae. Coleochaete sp. This alga is common in lakes with high grazing pressure from snails (Bronmark et al. 1992). and is not greatly affected by specialised microalgae grazers such as E. stagtialis (Barnese et al. 1990). We suggest that the lack of direct effects of crayfish on periphv ton was due to the dominance of tightlv attached alga. Most studies showing negative grazing effects of crayfish have been on periphvton dominated bv macroalgae such as Chladophora (Hart 1992. Creed 1994). whereas the effects on microalgae probablv are minor. In our short-term pool experiment, grazers probabh prevented the establishment of macroalgae. causing a dominance of prostrate, tiahtlv attached microaleae.
Effects of crayfish on food >veh interactions
Both the experimental results and the values of '-"N indicated that crayfish were top consumers in our food webs. Stable isotopes indicated that primarv' producers were the main source of organic matter to the food web. but the primary consumers probablv also assimilated terrestrial carbon, since thev had lower carbon values than the primary producers. The growth of an animal will determine how rapidly isotopic changes occur towards the values of the latest diet (Minagawa and Wada 1984. Michener and Schell 1994). The percentage mass increase for the oldest noble cravtish in our experiment was 16 + 4. whereas the mean increase for the one-v ear-old crayfish was 173 ± 14. The isotope values of the oldest crayfish in our studv would probablv reflect the feeding history and thus the original isotope values of these animals. In contrast, the younger crayfish reflect values of food assimilated during the experiment. The ratios for the other invertebrates should be reliable as a period of less than two months is sufficient to achieve an isotopic equilibrium with specific food sources (Rosenfeld and Roff 1992). Although crayfish were top consumers, thev also had both direct and indirect effects on lower trophic levels.
Invertebrate grazers were greatly reduced by crayfish, and indirectly, periphyton was positively affected by crayfish, probably a consequence of reduced grazing from Eymitaea snails. These results agree with previous studies showing that indirect interactions in the crayfish-snail-periphyton chain are strong, but the direct crayfish-periphyton link is weak (Weber and Lodge 1990, Lodge et al. 1994). Predatory invertebrates were, however, unaffected by crayfish. By feeding selectively, consumers may create communities that consist of prey species less afTected by predation (Strong 1992, Osenberg and Mittlebach 1996). Our results suggest that selective predation by crayfish may lead to an invertebrate assemblage dominated by species less afTected by crayfish, i.e. an invertebrate community dominated by active and sediment dwelling taxa. In the present study, the overall biomass of macrophytes was only moderately affected by crayfish, and periphyton appeared unafTected by crayfish grazing. Long-term data, however, suggest that macrophytes may by eliminated by signal and noble crayfish (Abrahamsson 1966, Nystrorn et al. 1996). Moreover, crayfish grazing on periphyton may outweigh any indirect positive efTect on periphyton due to reduced abundance of other grazers (Nystrom et al. 1996). As indicated by our stable isotope ratios and biomass measurements, invertebrates were the main food for crayfish. Experimental studies have shown that crayfish fed animal food had higher growth and survival rates than animals fed detritus, macrophytes or periphyton (Hill et al. 1993), suggesting that macrophytes and periphyton are low-quality, less preferred f\^od sources. Thus, strong negative crayfish effects on macrophytes and periphyton may only become expressed in the long term, or at higher crayfish densities when invertebrates are depleted. In the long term, the reduction of macrophytes by crayfish may also have several indirect effects on other trophic levels, and invertebrate taxa which are not often consumed by crayfish, such as predatory invertebrates, may eventually decline (Nystrom et al. 1996). Similarly, periphyton may indirectly be reduced by crayfish as a reduction of macrophytes affects the surface area colonisable for periphyton (Lodge et al. 1994).
Overall, our results suggest that the exotic signal crayfish has a stronger impact on the biomass of macrophytes and benthic grazers than the noble crayfish, while their preferences for macrophytes and invertebrates were similar. Because the biomasses of crayfish were the same, the difTerences are likely due to greater weight-specific consumption by the signal crayfish, in agreement with Nystrom and Strand (1996). The effects of the introduced Oreotwetes rusticus in Wisconsin lakes have received much attention (e.g. Capelli 1982). Oreotteetes rustieus has a stronger impact on macrophytes and snails than its native congeners, but show the same selectivity among macrophyte and
snail species (Olsen et al. 1991). When signal crayfish and noble crayfish co-occur, noble crayfish eventually decline (Soderback 1995). Thus, an introduction of signal crayfish in lakes may result in a greater impact on macrophytes and less mobile invertebrate grazers then if only the noble crayfish is present.
