xabstract
1. Previous studies documented that zebra mussels became abundant in the Hudson
River during 1992 causing an 80–90% reduction in phytoplankton biomass. This study
used intervention time series analysis of abundance, biomass and reproduction over the
period 1987–95 to assess changes in zooplankton in response to the invasion.
2. Zebra mussels caused a size-dependent decline in zooplankton. Microzooplankton,
including tintinnid ciliates, rotifers and copepod nauplii all declined in 1992 and were
scarce thereafter. Mean abundances of post-naupliar copepods and of cladocerans were
also lower following the invasion but these changes were not statistically significant
(P . 0.05). Egg ratios and clutch sizes for the dominant cladoceran, Bosmina freyi, were
not significantly related to zebra mussels, even though relatively low egg ratios were
observed after the invasion.
3. The strong declines in microzooplankton were probably caused by direct zebra
mussel predation. Estimated consumption rates by mussels were roughly equivalent to
maximum microzooplankton growth rates.
4. The total biomass of zooplankton in the Hudson River declined by more than 70%
following the invasion. Annual average zooplankton biomass was correlated with
chlorophyll, but biomass per unit chlorophyll in the Hudson River was much lower
than in lakes. The present study hypothesizes that this lower biomass reflects limitations
by riverine flow and by predation during summer.

xintroduction
The zebra mussel, Dreissena polymorpha Pallas, is
currently spreading through the freshwaters of North
America. After initial establishment in Lake St Clair
and the Great Lakes (Hebert, Muncaster & Mackie,
1989), zebra mussels expanded their range into major
river basins including the Mississippi, St Lawrence
and Hudson drainages (Johnson & Carlton, 1996;
Johnson & Padilla, 1996). Filter feeding by zebra
mussels reduced phytoplankton biomass and
increased water clarity in parts of the Great Lakes
(Hebert et al., 1991; Holland, 1993; Nicholls &
Hopkins, 1993; Fahnenstiel et al., 1995). Zebra mussels
also compete for food and overgrow other bivalves
(Ricciardi, Whoriskey & Rasmussen, 1995; Schloesser,
Nalepa & Mackie, 1996), such that populations of many
native bivalves are declining (Strayer & Smith, 1996).
These changes are clearly linked to the direct effects
of zebra mussels in removing phytoplankton or in
attaching to and overgrowing other organisms. Many
impacts on foodwebs, however, could result from
indirect effects (MacIsaac, 1996); for example, will
reductions of phytoplankton biomass reduce
herbivorous zooplankton and zooplanktivorous fish?
Will zebra mussels shift pathways of energy use to
the benthos and promote bottom-feeding fish? The
answers to these questions are uncertain. There are
few long-term comprehensive studies of foodwebs in
systems invaded by zebra mussels to provide data to
evaluate their impacts on various populations and
trophic groups. Further, compensatory responses at
individual, population and community levels might
ameliorate adverse effects of zebra mussels in many
cases. Interactions among foodweb components are
not sufficiently understood to allow sound predictions
of the net effect of zebra mussels.
Examination of an analogous invasion by the Asiatic
clam, Pomatocorbula amurensis (Schrenck), indicates
that plankton and plankton-feeding fish can decline
and remain at low levels. In this case, long-term data
for San Francisco Bay show that grazing by P. amurensis
caused large changes in phytoplankton (Alpine &
Cloern, 1992), zooplankton (Kimmerer, Gartside &
Orsi, 1994), and some fish (Moyle et al., 1992). The
three common copepod species declined by 50–90%,
mostly because of direct feeding on copepod nauplii
by P. amurensis (Kimmerer et al., 1994).
Zebra mussels also feed on smaller zooplankton,
such as rotifers and protozoans, but are less effective
at consuming larger crustaceans (MacIsaac, Sprules &
Leach, 1991; MacIsaac, Lonnee & Leach, 1995). In
western Lake Erie, where zebra mussels have become
abundant, rotifers and nauplii appear to have
declined while changes in cladocerans and postnaupliar
copepods have been transitory (MacIsaac
et al., 1995). The modest changes in larger zooplankton
are surprising given that phytoplankton biomass
declined during the same period (MacIsaac et al., 1995).
These changes agree, however, with a simulation
model based on Great Lakes pelagic foodwebs which
predicts strong negative effects of zebra mussels on
large phytoplankton (hence lower chlorophyll concentrations)
but only weak effects on small phytoplankton
and herbivorous zooplankton (Padilla et al.,
1996). If the observations and models from the Great
Lakes are general, a lack of change in the larger
crustacean zooplankton may buffer changes in other
trophic groups (zooplanktivorous fish) which depend
heavily on crustacean prey.
The repeated invasion of aquatic ecosystems by
zebra mussels provides large-scale experiments that
have the potential to reveal key interactions and
mechanisms of regulation in aquatic foodwebs. The
present study considers the effects on zooplankton of
a zebra mussel invasion of an ecosystem where a large
and sustained reduction in phytoplankton occurred
because of increased mussel grazing (Caraco et al.,
1997). Zebra mussels were first observed in the
Hudson River estuary in 1991. By the end of 1992,
the population had spread over the length of the
tidal freshwater section (Strayer et al., 1996). The
mussel population increased rapidly and by September
of 1992 there were 550 billion individuals river-wide
with an average abundance in the tidal freshwater
section of 4000 m–2 (Strayer et al., 1996). Post-invasion
density of the zebra mussel was sufficient to increase
grazing pressure on phytoplankton more than ten
times (Caraco et al., 1997). Summer chlorophyll concentrations
declined from an average of 30 µg L–1 prior
to the invasion to , 5 µg L–1 following the establishment
of the zebra mussel population.
Using data for years 1987–95, therefore including
both pre- and post-invasion observations, the present
study tests whether zooplankton declined in response
to increases in zebra mussels and decreases in phytoplankton.
Time series methods are applied to assess
both the uncertainty and magnitude of changes in
abundance and biomass. An analysis is made of
whether changes in zooplankton occurred throughout
the estuary or were restricted to areas of highest zebra
mussel density. This study evaluates whether changes
in zooplankton are related to a loss of phytoplankton
food or increased direct predation from zebra mussels.


xmethods

The Hudson River estuary has a north–south orientation
and extends from Battery Park at the southern
tip of Manhattan Island in New York City to the Green
Island Dam north of Troy, New York. Sampling focused
on the freshwater and oligohaline sections of the
estuary as described below (also see Findlay, Pace &
Fischer, 1996 for additional detail on stations and longterm
data).
Zooplankton sampling
The sampling, counting and biomass estimation
methods used by this study for zooplankton in the
Hudson River have previously been described (Pace,
Findlay & Lints, 1992) and these are only briefly
summarized here. From 1987 to 1995, zooplankton
were sampled every 2 weeks during the ice-free
season from April to early December at a station
near Kingston, New York. This station is located at
river km 152 as measured by the distance upstream
from Battery Park. Macrozooplankton (postnaupliar
copepods and cladocerans) were sampled by pumping
105 l of water through a 70- to 80-µm mesh net (except
in 1987 when a 150-µm mesh net was used, see Pace
et al., 1992). For microzooplankton (nauplii, rotifers,
tintinnids), 2-L samples were collected and passed
through a 35-µm mesh net. For both macro- and
microzooplankton, triplicate samples were collected
at each sampling time and preserved in a sucroseformalin
solution. In years 1992–95 the macrozooplankton
were sampled every 3–7 days from the
end of May to the middle of June, as part of a study
to document the interactions between zooplankton
abundance and larval fish (Limburg et al., 1997). These
data are included in the graphs illustrating zooplankton
dynamics but are excluded from the time
series analyses (described below), because these
statistical methods require even time intervals
between samples.
Macrozooplankton were counted with a
stereomicroscope at 253 magnification and microzooplankton
were counted with an inverted microscope
at 1003 magnification. Tintinnids were not
consistently counted during 1987 and so data for
this year were excluded. To estimate biomass, mean
weights determined from measurements made in an
earlier study were used (Pace et al., 1992). These
weights were 1.21, 0.737, 0.363 and 0.0324 µg dry
weight (DW) per individual for post-naupliar copepods,
cladocerans, nauplii and rotifers, respectively.
Using a single mean weight for each group introduces
uncertainty to the estimate of biomass, but species and
size-composition within the post-naupliar copepods,
cladocerans and nauplii were low. Rotifers were more
diverse, but nevertheless, all of the most abundant
groups had individual weights within a factor of two
of the mean estimate used. For tintinnid ciliates a
weight of 0.0197 µg DW per individual was used,
derived from volume estimates of Tintinnopsis lacustris
Entz [5 Codonella cratera (Leidy)] made by Pace (1982)
and using a weight to volume conversion factor of
0.279 pg DW µm–3 (Gates, Rogerson & Berger, 1982).
The eggs of ovigerous copepods and cladocerans
were counted. Copepod egg counts, however, were
unreliable because of detachment during sampling
and preservation. The egg ratio (eggs per female) and
clutch size of cladocerans were calculated as indices
of reproduction. The egg ratio is directly related to
the birth rate as a function of temperature and food
(Edmondson, 1972; Urabe, 1991).
In addition to the temporal sampling series at the
Kingston station, transects were conducted longitudinally
along the north–south axis of the Hudson River
estuary (see maps in Pace et al., 1992 and Findlay et al.,
1996 for further details). Six stations were sampled at
river km 65, 79, 122, 152 (Kingston), 193 and 228.
For much of the year all of these stations are tidal
freshwater. During summer, the salinity front (1 ppt)
extends above the two most seaward stations (river
km 65 and 79) and in the driest summers reaches the
station at river km 122 (near Poughkeepsie, New
York). Transects were conducted monthly or every
other month from April–October or November over
the years 1988–95. Consistently macrozooplankton but
not microzooplankton were sampled on these
transects.
Statistical analysis
To test whether zooplankton declined in concert with
the establishment of the zebra mussel population,
data were fit to an intervention time series model.
Intervention analysis accounts for autocorrelation in
time series and assesses whether a non-random change
occurred associated with an event such as the zebra
mussel invasion (Wei, 1990). Analysis of whether the
zebra mussel actually caused a change is dependent
on ecological interpretations that are consistent with
the observed response (see Carpenter, 1993). The following
model was used:
X(t) 5 µ 1 1/φ (B) 1 a(t) 1 α M(t) (1)
where X(t) represents zooplankton indexed at time
interval t, µ is the mean of the series, and a(t) a series
of uncorrelated residuals. B is the backshift operator
which expresses the effects on X of prior values of X
(e.g. BXt 5 Xt-1). φ(B) is the autoregressive operator
represented as a polynomial in the backshift operator.
For nearly all the models fit to the zooplankton time
series, φ(B) was a polynomial for observations one
time unit (2 weeks) and 1 year (seventeen samples per
year) in the past (1 – φ1 B1 – φ17 B17). M(t) represents a
manipulation series of dummy values which were
either zero before the zebra mussel population was
established or one after establishment. Time of the
intervention was set as the point where zebra mussel
populations were measured in 1992 (5 1 September)
and found to be at high densities (Strayer et al., 1996).
The parameter α expresses the magnitude of the
change in X(t) following the manipulation. The
magnitude and the direction of α is the statistic of
interest. The standard error of the estimate, as well as
the probability that α is significantly different from
zero, is tested by comparison with the standard tdistribution.
Models were fit with the ARIMA
procedure in SAS using the maximum likelihood
method (SAS Institute, 1993).
All time series of abundances and biomass were logtransformed
for analysis. Prior to log transformation,
measurements of zero densities were set at the
theoretical limit of detection– 0.5 L–1 for microzooplankton
and 0.01 L–1 for macrozooplankton. Missing
values were estimated by linear interpolation.
Sampling at the transect stations was not conducted
at even time intervals so that time series analysis of
this data was not possible. Instead, means from each
station were compared before and after the invasion
using a t-test. Serial correlation in the transect time
series was either non-existent or not severe, probably
because the time interval between sampling was long
(monthly or every other month). Consequently, the
assumption of independence in the observations
(required for a t-test) was reasonable for these data.

xresults
Zooplankton community composition
The zooplankton community of the Hudson is
simple. There are two dominant cyclopoid copepods,
Diacyclops bicuspidatus thomasi Forbes and Halicyclops
sp. The routine counts did not distinguish
between these species. Calanoids also occur but
tend to be less abundant in the freshwater section
relative to cyclopoids and more abundant in the
oligohaline seaward stations. The principal calanoid
is the estuarine copepod, Eurytemora affinis (Poppe).
Harpacticoid copepods are also found in plankton
samples at abundances typically , 1 L–1. Cladocerans
are almost exclusively Bosmina (subgenus Sinobosmina)
freyi De Melo & Hebert (B. longirostris O.F.
Mueller using older nomenclature, see De Melo &
Hebert, 1994). Species of Daphnia, Diaphanosoma and
Chydorus are present, as is the predatory cladoceran
Leptodora kinditi (Focke). The latter species was not,
however, adequately sampled with the methods
used in the present study. The rotifer community is
dominated by Polyarthra spp., Keratella cochlearis
Gosse, and Trichocerca spp. Species of the genera
Asplanchna, Ascomorpha, Brachionus, Collotheca, Filinia,
Kellicottia, Notholca, Pleosoma and Synchaeta were also
commonly observed. Sampling and counting methods
in the present study were not sufficient for quantitative
estimates of ciliates, except for the freshwater
tintinnid, Tintinnopsis lacustris, which was retained
on the 35-µm mesh net and easily counted along
with the other microzooplankton.
The individual species are aggregated below into
groups for the analysis of time series. The postnaupliar
copepods are essentially the two cyclopoid
species. Nauplii are an aggregate of all species.
Cladoceran dynamics are equivalent to the dynamics
of B. freyi. Rotifers represent a suite of species but
Polyarthra and Keratella were almost always dominant.
Tintinnids are one species.
Did zooplankton decline?
Beginning in mid-1992, and continuing through 1995,
all microzooplankton groups declined dramatically
(Fig. 1). Microzooplankton were most abundant
during the summer but after the invasion these
seasonal increases were virtually absent except for
nauplii. Tintinnids were variably abundant among
years but in some pre-zebra mussel years reached
densities of several thousand per litre. Following the
invasion, tintinnids never exceeded 250 L–1 (Fig. 1a).
Similarly prior to the invasion, rotifers typically
increased in summer to densities . 1000 L–1 but did
not exceed 200 L–1 after the mussel population became
established in late 1992 (Fig. 1b). Nauplii were also
less abundant following the mussel invasion (Fig. 1c),
although the change was less dramatic relative to
tintinids and rotifers.
Time series models confirmed the strong declines in
microzooplankton. All t-values for the the intervention
term, α, were significant (. 6 1.96) and magnitudes
were large (Table 1). The meaning of these models
can be assessed with an example. Assuming rotifer
abundances of 1000 L–1 at 2 weeks and 1 year prior to
time t (see eqn 1), predicted rotifer abundances at t
would be 303 L–1 and 42 L–1 in the absence and
presence of zebra mussels, respectively. Note that
rotifer abundances decrease for both scenarios because
abundances of 1000 L–1 are considerably above the
mean. The key point is the difference in the predicted
abundances before and after the invasion.
Changes in the abundance of the two principal
macrozooplankton groups were harder to discern
(Fig. 2). Cladocerans were extremely variable due to
the dynamics of the dominant species B. freyi, which
increased each year from abundances less than
0.1 L–1 to a brief maximum in early June often . 100
individuals L–1. Following this maximum the population
declined rapidly and then recovered with a second
but less pronounced increase in September–October.
The June maximum was observed in each of the
3 years following the invasion, although densities
never reached 100 individuals L–1, as observed in some
previous years (Fig. 2a). Because samples were taken
every 3–7 days during the Bosmina bloom period in
1992–95, the lower peaks are probably not due to
undersampling. Prior to the invasion, Bosmina also
increased to densities of . 10 L–1 in September–
October. The autumn increase did not occur at
all in 1992 when zebra mussels were reaching their
maximum densities. The autumn increase occurred in
1993 and 1994 but maximum densities were less than
10 L–1. In 1995, however, the autumn increase was
similar in magnitude to the pre-zebra mussel years
(Fig. 2a). Overall, cladoceran densities appeared lower
after the zebra mussel invasion, although seasonal
dynamics followed patterns observed prior to the
invasion.
Copepods were least affected by the invasion.
Abundances and dynamics in 1993–95 generally
resembled pre-invasion years. Copepods were scarce
in 1992, the year of highest zebra mussel densities.
The late season increase to densities . 10 L–1, characteristic
of 1988–91 did not develop in 1992 or 1993.
Both macrozooplankton groups declined (negative
intervention term) but the magnitude of the zebra
mussel effect was clearly different for the two major
groups. The intervention term for copepods was small
and not significant. For cladocerans the estimate of α
was less than twice its standard error (Table 1), the
normal criterion for retaining a term in time series
models (Wei, 1990). Nevertheless, the magnitude of α
was large. Thus, there is a strong possibility that
cladocerans declined but because of high variability
in the time series, the effect of zebra mussels was
difficult to differentiate clearly. Type II error (wrongly
Fig. 2 Abundance of
macrozooplankton, including (a)
cladocerans (note log scale), and (b)
post-naupliar copepods at the
Kingston station, 1987–95.
© 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd, Freshwater Biology, 39, 103–116
accepting the hypothesis of no change) is a concern
in this case.
Overall, the magnitude of zooplankton decline
was size dependent (Fig. 3). Zebra mussels had the
strongest effect on groups with average body sizes
, 0.1 µg DW. Decline was also substantial in groups
with body sizes in the 0.1–1.0 µg range, while decline
was minimal for animals with body sizes . 1 µg. This
conclusion, however, is limited by the small number
of size classes considered in the present study and the
large gap between size groups less than and greater
than 0.1 µg (Fig. 3).
Total zooplankton biomass also declined after the
invasion of the zebra mussel (Fig. 4). This change
was large (over 70%) and significant based on the
intervention model (Table 1); for example, assuming a
biomass of 100 µg DW L–1 at 2 weeks and 1 year before
time t, predicted zooplankton biomass at t would have
been 75 and 25 µg DW L–1 prior to and following the
invasion of the zebra mussel, respectively. The changes
in zooplankton biomass reflect the large contribution
of the three microzooplankton groups to total biomass;
for example during 1991, microzooplankton were 79–
99% of the zooplankton biomass, except on one date
when Bosmina exceeded 300 L–1. After the zebra mussel
invasion, microzooplankton were still frequently 50%
or more of the biomass, despite their lower abundance.
The importance of microzooplankton in the Hudson
reflects the general dominance of the community by
animals (including the crustaceans) of small size.
Longitudinal patterns of zooplankton in relation to
zebra mussels
Zebra mussels are not uniformly abundant in the
Hudson River. Strayer et al. (1996) documented highest
biomass (. 10 g DW m–2) in the section of the estuary
from river km 150–213, which includes the Kingston
time series station. Upstream of this section (river
km . 213), mussel biomass decreased by a factor of
ten. Downstream of this section (river km , 150),
mussel biomass decreased by a factor of 100. The
mid-estuary section (km 150–213) of highest mussel
biomass was also the region where phytoplankton
biomass and productivity were greatest prior to the
invasion (Caraco et al., 1997). After the invasion,
phytoplankton were strongly reduced throughout the
estuary above river km 100 (Caraco et al., 1997).
Given this distribution of mussels and phytoplankton,
a decline in zooplankton was expected at
the longitudinal sampling stations located upstream
of river km 100 and little change downstream of that
point. Four of the stations (1–4) were located above
river km 100 (see Methods). Two of these stations (2
and 3) were located in the region of highest mussel
density and greatest phytoplankton decline.
Spatial patterns in macrozooplankton abundance
were consistent with observations at the time series
station. There was little evidence of change in the
copepods (Fig. 5a). Lower means were observed after
the invasion at station 2 but not at station 3. None
of the means were significantly different (t-test, all
P . 0.3). Cladoceran abundances were lower at all
stations after the invasion, especially at stations 2 and
3 (Fig. 5b). Cladocerans were also highly variable,
however, so that none of the declines were significant
(t-tests, P . 0.2 except station 3, P 5 0.09). The patterns
of change generally matched expectations of the study
but, again, macrozooplankton decline was either slight
(copepods) or marked but difficult to detect because
of sampling variability (cladocerans).
Predation on zooplankton by zebra mussels
Specific predation (day–1) by zebra mussels on
zooplankton was estimated from average mussel
density (Strayer et al., 1996), published clearance rates,
and the average depth of the Hudson River (8 m). The
water column of the Hudson River is well mixed, with
no temperature stratification, so the entire zooplankton
community was available to zebra mussels. MacIsaac
et al. (1992) measured zebra mussel clearance rates in
the range of 20–100 mL per mussel h–1 and 1–2 mL per
mussel h–1 on rotifers and macrozooplankton (Bosmina
and cyclopoids), respectively. These ranges, using
large zebra mussels (. 20 mm), agree well with
measurement from other studies (Shevtsova et al.,
1986; MacIsaac et al., 1995).
Estimated zebra mussel predation was compared
with the maximum rates of zooplankton increase based
on laboratory studies and on observations in the
Hudson River (Table 2). Maximum growth rates of
rotifers fall within the range of estimated predation
rates. Predation alone, even at the lower mussel
densities observed in 1995, appeared sufficient to
suppress rotifers and other microzooplankton of
similar size. Predation on macrozooplankton was two
orders of magnitude lower than maximum growth
rates (Table 2). Although zooplankton growth is
frequently below maximum rates, zebra mussel
predation was probably not a significant loss
term for copepods and cladocerans in the Hudson
River.Did zooplankton reproduction decline after the
invasion?
Zooplankton reproduction is sensitive to both food
quantity and quality. The large reductions in phytoplankton
observed after mid-1992 (Caraco et al., 1997)
suggest that reproduction could have declined if
phytoplankton were limiting. The egg ratio and
clutch size of B. freyi were used to assess this
possibility.
Egg ratios were highly variable seasonally and
among years (Fig. 6a). Ratios increased and often
were highest during the spring period of maximum
abundance. Relatively low egg ratios were observed
in the years 1992, 1993 and 1994 (Fig. 6). Zebra mussel
densities were highest and chlorophyll concentrations
lowest during these years (Caraco et al., 1997). However,
low egg ratios were also observed in 1987, many
years prior to the mussel invasion, and high egg
ratios were observed in 1995 (Fig. 6a). There was no
significant impact of the zebra mussel invasion on the
egg ratio time series based on intervention analysis
(Table 1).Clutch size is also an index of reproduction that is
sensitive to food (Pace, Porter & Feig, 1984) and is
less influenced by age structure than the egg ratio,
where, for example, high juvenile abundance might
depress the egg ratio of an otherwise fecund population.
Analysis was not performed for time series of
clutch sizes, because some samples had only a few
reproductive individuals, so that clutch size estimates
for specific dates were highly uncertain. Instead, mean
annual clutch size was calculated by averaging clutch
size for all sampling times where reproductive individuals
were present. Clutch sizes were similar for all
years ranging from 1.3 to 1.7 eggs per reproductive
individual (Fig. 6b). Lowest mean clutch sizes were
observed in the first two full years (1993 and 1994)
following the zebra mussel invasion but variability in
these years was well within the range observed over
the entire period and mean clutch size in 1995 was as
high as any other year. Thus, losses of food did not
lead to a clear, long-term drop in reproduction of
B. freyi in the Hudson River as measured either by the
egg ratio or clutch size.

xdiscussion
The main result of this analysis is that zebra mussels
caused a strong size-dependent decline in zooplankton,
severely depleting the microzooplankton. The
magnitude and timing of the change were best related
to the invasion and establishment of the zebra mussel
population. The timing of the decline was consistent
with a similar decline observed for phytoplankton,
also attributed to zebra mussels (Caraco et al., 1997).
Other factors such as river flow and temperature were
unrelated to the changes in zooplankton; for example,
the initial years following the invasion (1993 and 1994)
were relatively low and high flow years, respectively
(see Caraco et al., 1997), and 1995 was a year of very
low freshwater flow (United States Geological Survey,
unpublished data). Zooplankton biomass in the
Hudson River is negatively correlated with flow (Pace
et al., 1992) so, in the absence of zebra mussels,
zooplankton biomass should have been relatively high
in 1993 and 1995 but was not (Fig. 7).
A probable cause of the reductions in tintinnids,
rotifers and nauplii was direct predation by the zebra
mussel. The loss of phytoplankton food cannot be
ruled out as a contributing cause of the microzooplankton
decline, because the present study has nomeasures of reproductive rates, which would have
dropped after the invasion if food was limiting.
Further, a decline in nauplii could also have resulted
from lower egg production by adult copepods. Nevertheless,
mussel predation alone appears sufficient to
account for the decline of all three groups of microzooplankton.
Decline in macrozooplankton was less clear. Zebra
mussels had little overall effect on copepods, although
the average abundance of copepods was lower after
the invasion. Cladocerans may well have declined,
but the intervention term of the time series analysis
was not significant at the 0.05 level. The analysis of
the cladoceran time series indicates that, even with
long-term data, important changes may be very diffi-
cult to detect in highly variable populations.
Zebra mussels have two possible impacts on macrozooplankton.
(i) They could consume some smaller
copepods and cladocerans, but these projected predation
rates were modest relative to expected growth
rates (Table 2). (ii) Mussels are also competitors for
phytoplankton. Loss of phytoplankton food did not
result in a decline in the dominant cyclopoids. These
copepods are omnivorous but, given the loss of both
microzooplankton prey and phytoplankton, it is
somewhat surprising that these species were not
affected. In addition, nauplii were also reduced so
fewer juvenile copepods were present to recruit to the
larger copepodite stages. These observations suggest
that the abundance of post-naupliar copepods is independent
of nauplii abundance in the Hudson River.
There may have been more subtle effects on copepod
demography, but the present study did not include
the stage-specific or species-specific analyses required
to examine this possibility.
In addition to phytoplankton, crustacean zooplankton
can use bacteria, protozoans and detritus as food.
Bacteria have not declined since the invasion (S.
Findlay, M. L. Pace & D. Fischer, unpublished data).
Cyclopoid copepods are not efficient at feeding on
particles as small as bacteria but do consume protozoa
(Sanders & Wickham, 1993). Bosmina does feed on
bacteria and, in the Hudson River, these potentially
account for a significant portion of this animal’s carbon
requirement (Vaque´ et al., 1992). The Hudson River is
a heterotrophic ecosystem with substantial degradation
of allochthonous carbon (Howarth, Schneider &
Swaney, 1996; Raymond, Caraco & Cole, 1997) and
very high rates of bacterial production (Findlay et al.,
1991). Resources derived from these heterotrophic
pathways may buffer crustacean zooplankton against
the loss of phytoplankton.
The residual phytoplankton in the Hudson River
may also be sufficient to sustain crustacean zooplankton
at, or near, their long-term densities. This
possibility is supported by a simulation model of
Green Bay in Lake Michigan (Padilla et al., 1996). In
that model zebra mussel grazing resulted in a dramatic
reduction of large phytoplankton but only modest
reduction in small phytoplankton and crustacean
zooplankton. Zooplankton were supported by
increased productivity of small phytoplankton
released from nutrient competition with large phytoplankton
(Padilla et al., 1996). Nutrient competition
among phytoplankton is much less important in the
turbid Hudson River because of light limitation (Cole,
Caraco & Peierls, 1992). There is, however, evidence
that specific phytoplankton growth rates increased
after the invasion of the zebra mussel due to increases
in summer transparency and shifts to more rapidly
growing species (Caraco et al., 1997).
Figure 7 illustrates the annual mean of total
zooplankton biomass (includes macro- and microzooplankton)
and chlorophyll at the time series station
for 1987–95 compared with data from Quebec lakes
collected using similar methods by Pace (1986). In the
Hudson River, average biomass ranged from 39 to
96 µg DW L–1 prior to the invasion, was 34 µg DW
L–1 in 1992, and was 16–20 µg DW L–1 for 1993–95.
Lower zooplankton biomass in the Hudson River was
well related to chlorophyll concentrations based on
these annual means (regression:r2 5 0.89). The decline,
however, probably reflects the similar effect of zebra
mussel grazing on phytoplankton and microzooplankton
rather than a loss of food for zooplankton, as
argued above. Zooplankton biomass in the Hudson
River is roughly tenfold lower than that in lakes at
similar chlorophyll concentrations. While net primary
production in the Hudson River is low (Cole et al.,
1992), resources derived from allochothonous carbon
and heterotrophic bacterial production are potentially
abundant (Vaque´ et al., 1992). The lower zooplankton
biomass relative to lakes is therefore surprising. This
paper has previously implied that water residence
limits population development (Pace et al., 1992), and
this view is supported by a strong positive relationship
between water residence time and zooplankton biomass
for thirty-one rivers studied by Basu & Pick(1996). This explanation, however, is not complete in
the case of the Hudson River because water residence
times during summer (months) are much longer than
zooplankton generation times (days to weeks).
These observations suggest that predation by invertebrates
and vertebrates may be an additional important
limitation for Hudson zooplankton. First, the
predatory cladoceran, Leptodora kindtii, increases to a
density of 0.1–1.0 L–1 after the Bosmina population
maximum in early June and may exert significant
predation pressure on macrozooplankton (M.L. Pace &
K.E. Limburg, unpublished data). Second, the Hudson
has many resident and anadromous fish with zooplanktivorous
life stages. These stages are most
abundant in both the freshwater and oligohaline sections
of the river during summer (Gladden et al., 1988;
Limburg, 1996). Finally, the zooplankton community
is dominated by small-bodied species, a trait characterizing
intense size-selective predation from fish (Brooks
& Dodson, 1965). This hypothesis of significant topdown
control of zooplankton requires further evaluation
but, if correct, would help to explain why
zebra mussels have had a limited impact on the
macrozooplankton.
If the main pathway of interaction between zebra
mussels and zooplankton is direct consumption, which
is highly size dependent, systems dominated by small
zooplankton should suffer larger declines when
invaded. Typically small zooplankton dominate systems
when predation from planktivorous fish is intense
(Brooks & Dodson, 1965). Planktivorous fish strongly
select the largest zooplankton, while zebra mussels
have their greatest impact on small zooplankton. So
zebra mussels and fish are complementary predators.
A key concern about the zebra mussel invasion is
that mussel grazing may alter the foodweb supporting
desired fish species. In particular, many fishes depend
on zooplankton during their early life stages and this
is especially true for the anadromous species that
use the Hudson River as a nursery (Limburg, 1996;
Limburg et al., 1997). Despite the substantial reductions
of phytoplankton and microzooplankton, however, the
availability and use of zooplankton by fish in the
Hudson River may not have changed as a consequence
of the invasion. The present study documented high
selectivity of larval white perch, Morone americana
(Waldbaum), and striped bass, M. saxatilis (Gmelin),
for copepods and cladocerans during 1994 (Limburg
et al., 1997). These species depend almost entirelyon macrozooplankton, and the gut contents of fish
observed in this study are similar to those found in
pre-zebra mussel years (Hjorth, 1988; R. Schmidt,
unpublished data). If dependence on, and high
selectivity for, the largest macrozooplankton (copepods)
is characteristic of other Hudson River fish
species, then the decline of zooplankton biomass may
be of little consequence to fish populations. This is an
example of how specific trophic interactions can buffer
species from substantial alterations of productivity
and energy flow in foodwebs.
The zebra mussel invasion in the Hudson River
represents a phytoplankton-removal ‘experiment’ at
an ecosystem scale. Perhaps the most surprising result
of this analysis is the persistence of crustacean
zooplankton, especially copepods, at or near levels
observed prior to the experiment. We would not have
predicted this result but, before the invasion, would
rather have argued for a stronger dependence of
zooplankton on phytoplankton. The lack of
dependence illustrates the value of studying largescale
perturbations to ecosystems. The results suggest
an interesting hypothesis about top-down regulation
of estuarine and riverine zooplankton communities,
indicate that the loss of phytoplankton may not cascade
up the foodweb to fish, and support the idea
that zooplankton in systems like the Hudson River
use a variety of energy sources, not just phytoplankton
production.
