xabstract
1. Biological invasions are a key element of human-induced global environmental change.
However, lack of knowledge of the indirect consequences of invasions, combined with poor
understanding of how their ecological effects depend upon competitive attributes of the
receiving community, hinders our ability to manage and predict the effects of invasive species
on ecosystems.
2. We established an experiment using a combination of both additive and substitutive experimental
designs to explore the effects of the globally spreading mysid shrimp Hemimysis
anomala on the biological structure of outdoor pond mesocosms in the absence and presence
of a functionally similar native competitor, Mysis salemaai.
3. The naturally smaller H. anomala had considerably stronger effects on primary producers,
multiple aspects of consumer assemblages and overall biological structure of the ponds in
comparison with the functionally similar native. Moreover, the magnitude of these effects was
generally independent of the presence of M. salemaai and even total mysid density. Hemimysis
anomala reduced both the abundance and diversity of zooplankton assemblages significantly,
triggering a strong trophic cascade on phytoplankton and a simultaneous increase of
benthic invertebrate biomass. These findings indicate that invasion by H. anomala may exacerbate
the effects of nutrient enrichment on lakes.
4. Our results demonstrate that introduced species can, irrespective of the presence of functionally
similar natives, induce complex changes to ecosystems that reach beyond direct consumptive
effects. Moreover, the cascading indirect effects of invasion can exacerbate the
impacts of other stressors. Disregarding the complexity of indirect effects therefore risks
underestimating significantly the global ecological footprint of biological invasions.

xintroduction
Biological invasions are a prominent component of
human-induced global environmental change (Vitousek
et al. 1996; Mace et al. 2005) and have important implications
for the functioning of ecosystems (Talley, Crooks &
Levin 2001; Olden et al. 2004; Strayer 2009). Direct
effects of invasive species on their resources or competitors
can be dramatic and conspicuous (Dick & Platvoet
2000; Hays & Conant 2007; Downing et al. 2012; Jackson
et al. 2012). Such strong direct interactions likely have
wider implications for biological communities, as indirect
effects ripple through food webs (Terborgh & Estes 2010;
Miller & terHorst 2012). However, lack of understanding
of the indirect consequences of biological invasions comprises
a key knowledge gap (Simberloff 2011). Thus, identification
of whole-ecosystem impacts of invasive species,
including their indirect effects, is crucial to improve
understanding of, and the ability to predict, the consequences
of invasion.
As indirect impacts of invasive species are typically esti-
mated from observational studies (e.g. Goldschmidt,
Witte & Wanink 1993; Berger et al. 2001; Croll et al.
2005; Ellis et al. 2011), understanding of overall impacts
of invasive species on ecosystems is limited by uncertainty
around underlying ecological mechanisms that determine
invasion success. Experiments carried out at ecologically
meaningful scales in realistic environments, which incorporate
multiple trophic levels and varying competitive scenarios,
are needed to elucidate underlying direct and
indirect mechanisms at play. Better understanding of competitive
interactions between invaders and functionally
similar native species provide an important benchmark
for assessing and predicting the consequences of invasion
(van Kleunen et al. 2010; Dick et al. 2013a).
Competitive pressure affects performance of species
through resource limitation and interference (Chase &
Leibold 2003). Functional redundancy in the receiving
community might, therefore, be expected to moderate the
ecological effects of introduced species (Massot et al.
1994; Byers 2002). Thus, whereas functionally novel
invaders can have particularly strong impacts on ecosystems
(Anderson et al. 2006; Strayer 2009; Martin et al.
2010), the presence of functionally similar native species
could, perhaps, dampen impacts (Griffen et al. 2010).
However, empirical evidence for this from real ecosystems
is scarce. Understanding how impacts of invasive species
are altered by competitive traits of the receiving community
is a key to predicting impacts of single-species invasions,
which is a prerequisite for advancing our
understanding of multiple invasions.
Inland waters are particularly prone to biological invasions
(Ricciardi 2006; Jackson & Grey 2013), owing to
their high connectivity and frequent exposure to multiple
human interference (Rahel 2007; Strayer & Dudgeon
2010). Mysid shrimp (Crustacea: Mysida) have a well-documented
history of global introductions, frequently with
pronounced impacts on their prey (Nesler & Bergersen
1991). In brackish water and freshwater, representatives
of this predominantly marine taxonomic order are relatively
uncommon and thus tend to be taxonomically and
functionally distinct (Mauchline 1980). In recent years,
the Ponto-Caspian Hemimysis anomala G.O. Sars, 1907,
has been spreading aggressively throughout Europe and
North America, achieving rapid population growth rates
(Audzijonyte, Wittmann & Vainola 2008; Marty et al.
2010; Minchin & Boelens 2010). In its expanding range,
other mysids are typically either absent or poorly represented
(Wittmann & Ariani 2009; Minchin & Boelens
2010; Ricciardi, Avlijas & Marty 2012). Thus, H. anomala
tends to introduce a high degree of functional novelty,
which likely enhances its invasion success. Simple twospecies
microcosm studies suggest that it is a voracious
predator of zooplankton (Dick et al. 2013b). However, its
wider ecosystem-level impacts are unknown. Part of its
distribution overlaps with the southern range limit of the
larger shrimp Mysis salemaai Audzijonyte & Vainola
(2005) (Minchin & Boelens 2010; Penk et al. 2015). Both
mysid species have similar feeding ecology, consuming
predominantly zooplankton with omnivorous subsidies
(Ketelaars et al. 1999; Viherluoto et al. 2000; Borcherding,
Murawski & Arndt 2006). They also exhibit the same
nocturnal vertical migration pattern, redistributing from
the benthos to the water column by night (Penk & Minchin
2014). Their high functional similarity would, therefore,
be expected to result in strong competition between
the species where they co-occur.
We established an experiment in outdoor pond mesocosms
to examine the effects of H. anomala on ecosystem
structure in the presence and absence of the functionally
similar native M. salemaai. We tested whether the invader
has stronger effects on its prey assemblages or overall
biological community structure than the native species
and whether these effects are moderated by competition.
Our experimental design also included both substitutive
and additive mixed-species polycultures to test whether
the moderating effect of the native species is densitydependent.

xmethods
experimental design
The experiment took place over 4 weeks in April 2012 in outdoor
ponds (140 L; dimensions 75 9 55 9 34 cm) located in the
grounds of the Department of Zoology, Trinity College Dublin,
Ireland (53°20035″ N, 6°1506″W). Biological communities in the
ponds were, therefore, exposed to natural environmental fluctuations
for the duration of the experiment. The substratum in the
ponds comprised a mix of pebbles, gravel, sand and mud to a
depth of 5 cm. Approximately 10 cobbles were piled in a shaded
area of each pond to provide anticipated daylight refugia for
mysids within interstitial spaces. The ponds were filled with tap
water [from Pollaphuca Reservoir (53°0900400N, 6°3200800W), pH:
82, conductivity: 154 lS cm
1] which was allowed to settle for
4 days prior to colonization with biota to remove chlorine-based
compounds. Throughout the experiment, water temperature in
the ponds ranged between 6 and 11°C and dissolved oxygen concentrations
always exceeded 115 mg L
1. Hemimysis anomala
and M. salemaai co-occur seasonally in the littoral zone of lakes
(Penk & Minchin 2014) where the water column tends to be well
mixed. Our experimental ponds aimed to mimic such habitat.
Nevertheless, our mesocosms lacked many of the environmental
gradients present in natural lakes, which could have altered the
magnitude of the observed effects. We therefore placed key
emphasis in our analyses on the relative effects of the invader in
comparison with those of the functionally similar native, with an
underlying assumption that any artefacts of our experimental setup
would affect both shrimp species similarly.
Our experimental design comprised five treatments, each replicated
four times. Two of those treatments comprised monocultures
of the native M. salemaai (M) and invasive H. anomala (H) at densities
of four shrimps per pond, equivalent to 29 individuals m
3.
Two additional treatments contained both mysid species in equal
proportions; in substitutive polyculture (MHsub), where total mysid
density was equal to that in the monocultures (i.e. four shrimps per
pond, 29 individuals m
3) and in additive polyculture, where total
mysid density was equal to the sum of that in the two monocultures
(i.e. eight shrimps per pond, 58 individuals m
3). Mysid densities
used in our experiment were chosen to be consistent with densities
found naturally in the field (Penk & Minchin 2014). In addition, a
fifth treatment comprised ponds that contained no mysid species.
Comparison of this latter treatment with each of the two monocultures
enabled us to quantify individual effects of both H. anomala
and M. salemaai on ecosystem structure. In polyculture, an additive
combined effect of H. anomala and M. salemaai would be indicated
by the substitutive polyculture (MHsub) exhibiting an effect
similar to the mean of the two monocultures or, alternatively, by
the additive polyculture (MHadd) exhibiting an effect equal to the
sum of the two monocultures. Significant positive or negative deviations
from additivity would indicate, respectively, synergistic or
antagonistic interactions. Moreover, differences in the nature of
these effects (i.e. antagonistic, additive or synergistic) between the
substitutive and additive polycultures would indicate an effect of
mysid density.
We populated our ponds with equal volumes of well-mixed
biota taken from the source lake of the water used in the experiment
(Pollaphuca) and four additional lakes [Derravaragh
(53°3700000N, 7°1703300W), Ennell (53°280060 0N, 7°2305500W),
Gowna (53°5101600N, 7°3303900W) and Owel (53°3403000N,
7°220060 0W)], cumulatively representing a wide range of conditions
(conductivity: 90–430 lS cm
1; total phosphorus: 10–
45 lg P L
1) and thus promoting establishment of diverse communities.
The ponds were inoculated initially with planktonic and
benthic algae. Four days later, benthic invertebrates and zooplankton
(collected with, respectively, 500 and 63 lm mesh nets)
were added at densities similar to those in the source lakes. We
added each inoculum in a number of small aliquots rather than
all at once, and we mixed inoculum each time it was sampled to
minimize variability among aliquots. Furthermore, we assigned
treatments to ponds at random to ensure that initial treatment
conditions were unlikely to be affected in any systematic way.
The mean (SE) richness of zooplankton and benthic invertebrates
at the end of experiment was, respectively, 40  01 and
195  08 taxa per pond, respectively, with densities of 55  06
organisms L
1 and 825  69 organisms m
2. Adult individuals
of M. salemaai [body length (mean  SE): 177  01 mm; biomass:
421  07 mg] and H. anomala (114  02 mm, 227 
11 mg) were collected from Loughs Oughter (54°0100400N,
7°290150 0W) and Ree (53°2704500N, 7°550270 0) and added to the
ponds where required for particular treatments. Owing to occasional
mortality, over the course of the experiment, we replaced
34% of the initial shrimp numbers with individuals of similar size
to maintain shrimp densities in our experimental design.
sampling and laboratory analyses
Between 05 and 1 L of water sampled from mid-depth was passed
through a 12-lm glass fibre filter (Whatman GF/C; GE Healthcare
Life Sciences, Little Chalfont, UK) under a suction pressure
of between 02 and 04 bar for subsequent determination of
phytoplankton biomass. This was determined colourimetrically as
chlorophyll a using a Hach DR5000 spectrophotometer (Du¨ sseldorf,
Germany) after methanol extraction (Standing Committee of
Analysts 1983). Biomass of benthic algae was quantified in situ as a
mean of two measurements of chlorophyll a concentrations on an
unglazed ceramic tile that was placed in each pond before initiation
of the experiment. Evidence accumulated from numerous studies
indicates that such tiles support the establishment of assemblages
that are qualitatively similar to those on natural hard substrata
(e.g. Sladeckova 1962; Clifford, Casey & Saffran 1992). These
measurements were made with a handheld BBE Moldaenke BenthoTorch
(Schwentinental, Germany) fluorometer, which has been
demonstrated to provide reliable quantification of concentrations
of total chlorophyll a in situ (Kahlert & McKie 2014).
The densities of individual zooplankton taxa were quantified at
the end of the experiment from ten 1 L aliquots taken at middepth
from throughout each pond and filtered through a 250-lm
sieve. Total zooplankton biomass was quantified from a sweep
sample from entire ponds to downweigh the potential influence
of weighing error. Densities of individual taxa and total biomass
of benthic invertebrates were quantified from a sweep sample
from entire ponds using a 1-mm mesh net after disturbing the
substratum vigorously to dislodge organisms. Faunal biomasses
were determined to the nearest 01 mg using Mettler Toledo
B154-S (Greifensee, Switzerland) analytical balance. We used the
Shannon–Wiener index (calculated using natural logarithms) and
Pielou’s evenness, both calculated based on species abundances,
as measures of the diversity of both zooplankton and benthic
invertebrates.
In addition to the final zooplankton and chlorophyll a analyses,
we monitored the development of open-water assemblages in
our ponds weekly. Zooplanktons were counted alive and then
returned to the ponds, which limited accuracy of our estimates.
Even though these intermediate zoo- and phytoplankton data
showed some fluctuation, shrimp treatment effects were apparent
1 week after the commencement of the experiment and their magnitude
changed little over time (Fig. S1, Supporting information).
data analyses
Biomasses of four key components of the pond ecosystems,
benthic primary producers (benthic algae), open-water primary
producers (phytoplankton), benthic consumers (benthic invertebrates)
and open-water consumers (zooplankton), were used as
proxy measures of biomass production (e.g. Hooper et al. 2005)
and, analysed together in a multivariate framework, as a measure
of biological structure in our ponds. We used analysis of variance
(ANOVA) to test for effects of experimental treatments on the biomasses
of each of the four individual components of the pond
ecosystems and on the densities, species richness and measures of
diversity of consumers. Treatment contrasts were used to quantify
standardized effect sizes (t ratios) of shrimp treatments in
comparison with treatment with no mysids. The Student–Newman–
Keuls procedure was used to make post hoc comparisons
among levels of significant terms. All abundance and all biomass
data with exception of benthic algae were loge-transformed for
these analyses to ensure data homoscedasticity and normality.
Treatment effects on overall biological structure and consumer
community structure of the ponds were tested using permutational
multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA; Anderson,
Gorley & Clarke 2008) with 9999 unrestricted permutations of
raw data. These analyses were based on, respectively, Euclidian
distance and Bray–Curtis similarity matrices, calculated from biomasses
and species abundances. Key groups contributing to dissimilarity
among significant pairs of treatments in PERMANOVA
were identified using similarity percentage analysis (SIMPER;
Clarke 1993). All abundance and biomass data were loge-transformed
for these analyses to, respectively, downweigh the influence
of highly abundant taxa and equalize the different scales of
biomass measurements.
We quantified the total interaction strengths between mysids
and both benthic and open-water consumers and primary producers
as the natural logarithm of the ratio of untransformed
biomass of each of these components in each pond to their mean
untransformed biomass in ponds without shrimp (Berlow et al.
2004). This unitless measure of interaction strength reflects the
net effect of both direct and indirect interspecific and intraspecific
interactions of all mysids present in a pond. These were not
expressed per capita because we could not partition the interaction
strengths robustly between the two mysid species present in
polyculture.
A constant (x + 1) was added to abundances of each taxon to
enable transformation of zero values. Univariate and multivariate
analyses were performed using, respectively, R (Version 3.1.1, R
Core Team 2014) and PRIMER
 (Version 6.1.13, PRIMER-E Ltd.,
Plymouth, UK). Mean values are given with their associated
standard error throughout.

xresults
The biomass of phytoplankton (ANOVA; F4,15 = 124,
P < 0001), benthic algae (F4,15 = 35, P < 005), zooplankton
(F4,15 = 198, P < 0001) and benthic invertebrates
(F4,15 = 33, P < 005) all varied significantly
among our experimental treatments (Fig. 1). Phytoplankton
biomass was significantly higher in both H. anomala
and M. salemaai monocultures, compared with the noshrimp
treatment, but the effect of H. anomala was over
double that of M. salemaai (Fig. 1a). The effect of the
substitutive polyculture was intermediate between the two
monocultures whereas the effect of the additive polyculture
was similar to that of the substitutive polyculture
and H. anomala alone, indicating a non-interactive, additive
effect of both species occurring together at the lower
density but an antagonistic interaction at higher mysid
densities (Fig. 1a). In contrast, the effect of the two mysid
species on benthic algae biomass was significantly different
and opposite to each other, with M. salemaai having
a negative effect and H. anomala a positive effect
(Fig. 1b). Further, all treatments that included M. salemaai
contained a similar biomass of benthic algae, regardless
of its abundance or the co-occurrence of H. anomala.
Zooplankton biomass was reduced significantly in both
H. anomala and M. salemaai monocultures compared
with the treatment lacking shrimp (Fig. 1c). However, the
effect of H. anomala was in excess of double that of
M. salemaai. Further, all treatments with H. anomala,
regardless of its density or the presence of M. salemaai,
contained a similar biomass of zooplankton (Fig. 1c).
Each of the density (ANOVA; F4,15 = 265, P < 0001),
diversity (F4,15 = 99, P < 0001), evenness (F4,15 = 133,
P < 0001) and multivariate structure (PERMANOVA;
pseudo-F4,15 = 100, P < 0001) of zooplankton communities
varied significantly among our experimental treatments
(Fig. 2). Effects on zooplankton density were
similar those on its biomass (Fig. 2a). Unlike the results
for biomass, however, the effect of the additive polyculture
on zooplankton density was stronger than all other
treatments and similar to the sum of the two monocul-
tures, indicating an additive effect of H. anomala and
M. salemaai at higher densities (Fig. 2a).
Zooplankton diversity and evenness were reduced significantly
by the presence of H. anomala alone, irrespective of
the presence or absence of M. salemaai or of the density of
H. anomala (Fig. 2b,c). Zooplankton community structure
differed significantly in both the H. anomala and M. salemaai
monocultures compared with the no-shrimp treatment,
but the effect of H. anomala was significantly stronger and
double that of M. salemaai (Fig. 2d). Further, the effect of
H. anomala was again independent of its stocking densities
or the presence of M. salemaai. SIMPER analysis showed
that all significant pairwise differences in zooplankton
community structure among treatments were driven primarily
by decreased density of the Daphnia hyalina-galeata
group and Daphnia obtusa in all treatments containing mysid
shrimp compared with the no-shrimp treatment, and in
all treatments containing H. anomala, regardless of its
abundance or co-occurrence of M. salemaai, compared
with the treatment containing M. salemaai alone (Table S1
and Fig. S2). The density of the calanoid copepod Eudiaptomus
gracilis was only reduced significantly in additive
polyculture, concurrent with a general depletion of Daphnia
species, suggestive of mysids switching to a different
prey at high shrimp densities (Fig. S2).
Even though statistical comparison of the effects of
H. anomala and M. salemaai on the biomass of benthic
invertebrates was inconclusive, biomass of benthic invertebrates
was nonetheless significantly greater in the treatment
containing H. anomala alone compared with the
treatment lacking mysids (Fig. 1d). This was not the case
in ponds containing M. salemaai in monoculture or in
any of the polycultures. Our experimental treatments
had, however, no effect on the density (ANOVA;
F4,15 = 03, P = 089), species richness (F4,15 = 08, P =
053), diversity (F4,15 = 10, P = 044), evenness (F4,15 =
033, P = 085) or multivariate structure (PERMANOVA;
pseudo-F4,15 = 080, P = 080) of benthic invertebrate
communities.
The overall biological structure in our experimental
ponds varied significantly among treatments (PERMANOVA;
pseudo-F3,12 = 112, P < 0001; Fig. 3), with the effect of
H. anomala in monoculture over double that of M. salemaai
(Fig. 3a). Further, the effect of H. anomala was again
independent of stocking densities or the presence of
M. salemaai (Fig. 3a). These results were driven primarily
by strong positive and negative effects on, respectively,
phytoplankton and zooplankton biomasses in all treatments
containing shrimp compared with the treatment
without shrimp, and in all treatments containing H. anomala
compared with the treatment containing M. salemaai
alone (Fig. 3b). Foreguts of ten individuals of both mysid
species selected randomly from experimental treatments at
the end of the experiment (Fig. S3) contained a similar
range of food items and included insect larvae (Chironomidae,
Culicidae), zooplankton (Daphnia, Copepoda,
Rotifera) as well as unicellular (Bacillariophyceae, Chlorophyta
and Cyanobacteria) and filamentous algae.

xdiscussion
Our results show that the globally spreading invader
H. anomala can alter the biological structure of pond ecosystems
significantly, irrespective of its density or the presence
of a functionally similar native species. The presence
of H. anomala triggered a strong trophic cascade and
altered the strength of benthic–pelagic coupling by
increasing biomass of phytoplankton and benthic invertebrates,
respectively. This demonstrates that introduced
species can induce complex whole-ecosystem changes
reaching beyond immediate consumptive effects. Disregarding
the complexity of these indirect interactions therefore
risks underestimating significantly the global
ecological footprint of biological invasions.
Whereas theory posits that the presence of functionally
similar native species dampens the impacts of invaders,
we found that not only the direct impact on prey assemblages,
but also the whole-ecosystem effects of H. anomala
were independent of the presence of M. salemaai or,
indeed, overall mysid stocking densities. These findings
provide, therefore, empirical evidence that strongly interacting
invaders can affect ecosystems irrespective of the
presence of functionally similar natives. However, we used
a relatively simple set of competition scenarios, and thus,
our results do not necessarily oppose outright the intuitively
compelling, yet disputed, view that functional
redundancy improves resistance against invasions (Stachowicz
et al. 2002; Griffen et al. 2010). Nonetheless, our
results suggest that the significantly greater interaction
strengths of the invader compared with the native species
in our ponds enabled the former to dominate the competitive
interactions despite considerable functional similarity.
Unlike the univoltine M. salemaai, the more active
H. anomala has multiple broods in a single year and also
has a higher brood size (Andrew & Woodward 1993;
Borcherding, Murawski & Arndt 2006), which implies
higher productivity and greater energy requirements. This
asymmetry would likely predispose H. anomala to establish
abundant populations in lakes that contain M. salemaai
or other similar shrimp species (Audzijonyte &
Vainola 2005) throughout the Northern Hemisphere.
Hence, not accounting for such asymmetries in interaction
strengths is likely to inflate uncertainty in predicting invasion
success.
Top-down trophic cascades have been associated mostly
with vertebrate predators (Goldschmidt, Witte & Wanink
1993; Reissig et al. 2006; Terborgh & Estes 2010; Estes
et al. 2011), but we found that H. anomala predation on
zooplankton triggered a cascading effect on phytoplankton.
Whereas both shrimp species ingested microalgae,
observed increases in phytoplankton biomass must have
been driven by considerable reduction in grazing pressure
as a consequence of the consumption of zooplankton by
shrimp, which clearly overrode the direct consumptive
effect of shrimp on phytoplankton. Concurrent with
decreased zooplankton biomass, phytoplankton biomass
more than doubled in the presence of H. anomala com-
pared with treatments containing only the larger M. salemaai,
and quadrupled compared to ponds with no mysids.
These results demonstrate that the positive scaling of
the weight-specific strength of trophic cascades with body
size (DeLong et al. 2015) is not universal. While nutrient
enrichment has been found previously to enhance the performance
of introduced species (Gonzalez et al. 2010;
Wikstrom & Hillebrand 2012), our results indicate that
introduced zooplanktivores may, in turn, enhance the
manifestation of eutrophication by increasing phytoplankton
biomass further in nutrient-enriched systems. Moreover,
the increased biomass of benthic invertebrates in
ponds containing H. anomala, which are likely a consequence
of a transfer of nutrients from open water to benthos
via faecal pellets of shrimp, many of which we
observed on the substratum, indicates that indirect
impacts of invaders can radiate to other biota, not only
within, but also among habitats.
In contrast to M. salemaai, H. anomala reduced the
diversity of open-water consumers significantly. Diversity
is an important attribute of biological communities, which
increases the available range of species-specific responses
(Stachowicz et al. 2002). Thus, the impoverished diversity
caused by the presence of H. anomola likely has important
implications for ecological stability (Donohue et al. 2013)
and a broad range of ecosystem functions (Hector &
Bagchi 2007; Gamfeldt, Hillebrand & Jonsson 2008). Our
results show that, where H. anomala was present, abundance
of Daphnia was depleted severely relative both to
ponds lacking mysid shrimps and those containing the
ecologically similar M. salemaai (by 92% and 82%,
respectively). Field observations concur with this finding
(Ketelaars et al. 1999). Hemimysis anomala seems more
active and is more aggressive than M. salemaai (Penk
2014), which is conducive to, respectively, both higher
prey encounter rates and probability of attack and could
therefore result in higher predation rates. Single-prey
studies found that the smaller H. anomala is a more efficient
predator of Daphnia compared with M. salemaai
(Dick et al. 2013b; Barrios-O’Neill et al. 2014), but it is
not clear if this indicates stronger feeding specialization
on zooplankton, higher overall energy consumption or
both. Unlike H. anomala, M. salemaai was frequently
observed in contact with substratum during our experiment
and it may consume more benthic material compared
with the invader. On the other hand, the higher
reproductive output of H. anomala (Andrew & Woodward
1993; Borcherding, Murawski & Arndt 2006) implies
a higher energy requirement. Herbivorous cladocerans are
an important link in trophic chains (Murtaugh 1981; Hanazato
& Yasuno 1989) and their availability to secondary
consumers is therefore likely to be jeopardized in the
presence of H. anomala. Moreover, our results indicate
switching of mysid feeding from Daphnia to the smaller
and more nimble and hence energetically less beneficial,
calanoid copepod prey in additive polyculture, concurrent
with the depletion of Daphnia. Similarly, other planktivores
are probably increasingly reliant on less beneficial
prey in the presence of H. anomala, thus altering further
trophic dynamics among consumers.
Experimental manipulations in ecologically realistic settings
are an invaluable tool for elucidating mechanisms
underpinning both the success and consequences of biological
invasions. Our ponds contained realistic levels of
diversity and biomass of primary producers and invertebrate
consumers, similar to those found in natural lake
systems. Given the importance to our experimental design
of maintaining constant mysid densities for the duration
of the experiment, we did not introduce fish predators to
our ponds. However, mysid densities in our experiment
reflected natural densities in lakes with robust fish communities
and were, therefore, representative of shrimp
populations already structured by fish predation. Further,
the presence of fish has been shown to subdue feeding of
M. salemaai but not of H. anomala (Barrios-O’Neill et al.
2014). It would, therefore, be expected that both direct
and indirect effects of M. salemaai, but not H. anomala,
would be suppressed in the presence of fish, thus magnifying
the comparative impacts of H. anomala.
Our results indicate that invasive species can induce
complex whole-ecosystem changes reaching beyond immediate
consumptive effects and that strongly interacting
invaders can do so regardless of the presence of functionally
similar natives. These findings highlight the need for
experiments that quantify indirect effects of species to
unveil the complete footprint of biological invasions.
Moreover, they also point out that, when forecasting the
success and ecosystem-level impacts of biological invasions,
asymmetries between interaction strengths of invader
and resident species with other biota should be
considered in tandem with the degree of their functional
redundancy.