xabstract
Conditions fostering coexistence of native species with invasive species have received little attention in invasion biology, especially for closely related invasive and native species. We used long-term datasets on multiple replicate invasions to deﬁne conditions under which native virile crayﬁsh (Orconectes virilis) can coexist with invasive rusty crayﬁsh (O. rusticus). We examined multiple drivers of coexistence involving habitat use and predation at between-lake and within-lake scales to derive predictions that could guide prioritization efforts to prevent future introductions of rusty crayﬁsh and mitigate impacts of existing invasions. Lakes in which native species persisted for many years had signiﬁcantly less cobble and sand habitats, and signiﬁcantly more vegetated habitats compared to lakes from which native crayﬁsh have been displaced. In the presence of rusty crayﬁsh, virile crayﬁsh alter their habitat use to vegetated habitats relative to habitat use in the absence
of rusty crayﬁsh. Such vegetated habitats had greater plant standing crop, plant species richness, and sediment percent organic matter compared to vegetated sites occupied by rusty crayﬁsh. Our results suggest that low abundance of cobble habitat and altered habitat use allows native crayﬁsh to coexist with the rusty crayﬁsh invader. At the within-lake scale, virile crayﬁsh persist by escaping predation in the vegetated habitats, despite suboptimal abiotic conditions. By understanding these abiotic and biotic conditions that promote coexistence, managers could enhance native crayﬁsh persistence by targeting high cobble lakes for efforts to prevent the introduction of invasive crayﬁsh, and targeting vegetated habitats for protection in already invaded lakes.

xintroduction
Conserving native species in the face of invasion by competing species increasingly challenges the management usefulness of ecologists’ understanding of the mechanisms of species coexistence. For some wellstudied cases, ecologists know that coexistence among potentially competing species can be mediated by predation when predators modify the interactions of potential competitors, e.g., keystone predation (Paine
1966), and predation-mediated competition (Pﬁster 2006) including apparent competition (Holt 1977). It has also long been known that coexistence can occur when potentially competing species use food, habitat, or other resources at different temporal or spatial scales (niche partitioning, e.g., Huffaker 1958; Hutchinson1961;Werner and Hall1976).However,at realistically large spatial scales, the mechanisms of species coexistence have been difﬁcult to study experimentally and to apply in species management (Lewin 1983; Chase and Leibold 2003; Fox and Barreto 2006). Biological invasions often provide the opportunity to study species interactions at large spatial scales in ‘natural experiments’ and the invasions themselves pose a challenge to apply ecological knowledge to conserve native species (Lodge 1993; Shea and Chesson 2002; Sax et al. 2005). In emphasizing the impacts of invasions (Bossenbroek et al. 2005; Puth and Post 2005), especially the extirpation of native species (Wilcove et al. 1998; Sax and Gaines 2003), few ecologists have tried to identify the conditions under which native species can coexist with invasive species, especially species that are closely related or functionally similar. Even most recent studies that have examined the importance to coexistence of predation (Bailey et al. 2006), habitat use (Hesselschwerdt et al. 2008), shifts in diet or temporal activity (Harrington et al. 2009) and spatial scale (Vaughn and Spooner 2006), have not incorporated multiple drivers of coexistence (MacDougall et al. 2009) at multiple scales relevant to species management. Here we address multiple drivers, multiple spatial scales, and the longer time scales appropriate to species management. Although invasive species have caused many local extinctions, especially in freshwater ecosystems, in many cases, invasive species do not cause large scale extirpations (Gurevitch and Padilla 2004). Instead impacts of invasive species vary spatially with native species being displaced in some sites while at other sites native and invasive species coexist (e.g., MacNeil et al. 2001a; Zanatta et al. 2002; Palmer and Ricciardi 2004). While it is important to understand the impacts and potential for invasive species to extirpate native species, conservation efforts will more often beneﬁt from understanding the conditions that allow native and invasive species to coexist (Laha and Mattingly 2006). Such understanding, for example, could inform
prioritization by management agencies with limited budgets for invasion prevention in those habitats most likely to suffer the worst impacts, including extirpation of native species, if an invasion were to occur. Because biological invasions are dynamic processes (Sax et al. 2005), the time since species introduction must be included in an analysis of native and invasive species coexistence to avoid mistaking short term outcomes for long term outcomes. Studies over short time periods are likely to underestimate impacts on native species because they are dominated by lag times between introduction and population establishment, and between establishment and impact on native species (Kolar and Lodge 2001; Crooks 2005). Many studies cited above record when nonnative species were introduced to the region of study but do not indicate how long a species has been in the speciﬁc study location and do not adequately consider the lag times. We caution that it may be impossible to assess the ability of native species to coexist with introduced species without considering the dynamics of invasion over long time periods. Our analyses here illustrate the importance of considering time since establishment in understanding patterns of coexistence between native and introduced crayﬁshes. We used two closely related and ecologically similar crayﬁsh species (Lodge and Hill 1994), the invasive rusty crayﬁsh (Orconectes rusticus) and the native virile crayﬁsh (Orconectes virilis) as a model system to study the conditions in lakes in northern Wisconsin and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula that lead to long-term coexistence. Rusty crayﬁsh are native to the Ohio River Basin in northern Kentucky, southern Indiana, and southwestern Ohio (Taylor and Redmer 1996) but have occurred in northern Wisconsin and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula since the 1960s, most likely introduced by anglers using them as bait (Capelli and Magnuson 1983). Once established in lakes, rusty crayﬁsh have direct and indirect effects on aquatic vegetation, macroinvertebrates, and ﬁsh populations (Peters et al. 2008; Hobbs and Lodge 2009). In some lakes, rusty crayﬁsh have extirpated the native virile crayﬁsh through multiple mechanisms including competition for shelter and food (Hill and Lodge 1999). Furthermore, these competitive interactions can lead to differential predation rates by ﬁshes on rusty and virile crayﬁsh, leaving virile crayﬁsh more susceptible to predation and the non-lethal negative impacts of predatory ﬁsh (Hill and Lodge 1999).
Rusty crayﬁsh have extirpated native virile crayﬁsh populations in many lakes (Capelli 1982; Hill and Lodge 1999), creating the expectation that extirpation was inevitable in all lakes and only a matter of time. Although it is clear that rusty crayﬁsh can extirpate the native crayﬁsh, there are still lakes where both species are currently found long after the invasion of rusty crayﬁsh. We examined the potential for rusty and virile crayﬁsh to coexist at two scales, the between-lake scale, and for lakes supporting both species, the within-lake scale. First we examined the relative abundance of the two species of crayﬁsh with long-term trapping records from the past 30 years, which allowed us to determine the extent of time the two species have been found together and to estimate the lag time between rusty crayﬁsh establishment and virile crayﬁsh extirpation. Second we examined the abiotic and biotic conditions that may allow coexistence at the two spatial scales. At the between-lake scale we expected that the littoral habitat availability would differ between lakes with and without coexistence, and that we could develop a model to identify lakes at the highest risk for extirpation of native crayﬁsh if rusty crayﬁsh became established. In particular, we hypothesized that coexistence and crayﬁsh abundance was driven by a difference in the abundance of three major littoral habitats (cobble, unvegetated sand or organic sediments, and vegetated sediments; Lodge and Hill 1994). In particular, we focused on cobble, which unlike sand and vegetation is not affected by crayﬁsh removal of vegetation (Peters et al. 2008). To more closely examine the drivers of coexistence patterns at the within-lake scale, we compared the physical properties of vegetated habitats that are used by both crayﬁsh species, but appear to be preferred by virile crayﬁsh in the presence of rusty crayﬁsh. We expected a difference in the physical properties of the type of vegetated habitats with virile crayﬁsh using vegetation that had a greater plant density and organic content and therefore harsher abiotic conditions (Lippson 1976). Finally, we hypothesized predation would be greatest on unvegetated sand (Kershner and Lodge 1995) and used ﬁeld experiments to assess how predatory ﬁshes and the abiotic conditions in sand and vegetated habitats affected the mortality of the two species, thereby directly testing mechanisms associated with coexistence. Our research adds three major advances to previous research on drivers of coexistence between similar
native and invasive species. First, because we possess a long-term (over 30 years) data set on species abundance, we are able to assess the mechanisms of the displacement of virile crayﬁsh by rusty crayﬁsh on an appropriately long time scale. Second, lake systems provide replicates across the landscape that are especially easily deﬁned compared to terrestrial ecosystems (MacIsaac et al. 2004; Bossenbroek et al. 2007). Finally, whereas previous studies examining invasive and native species coexistence typically focus on just one driver leading to coexistence, we examined multiple drivers including the physical difference in lakes with and without coexistence, and crayﬁsh use of habitats and its inﬂuence on the survival in the presence and absence of predators at the between-lake and the within-lake scale. Thus our results may provide the foundation for management and conservation efforts for native crayﬁsh across multiple lakes.

xmethods
Crayﬁsh collection and snapshot survey
Using data from all or a subset of 54 lakes, crayﬁsh coexistence patterns and the drivers of those patterns were examined at two scales (between-lake and within-lake). The 54 lakes sampled were in northern Wisconsin (Vilas, Oneida counties) and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula (Gogebic, Iron counties; lakes listed in Online Resource Table 1). We used all 54 lakes for a snapshot survey of species composition. For each lake, we determined crayﬁsh composition and abundance, as measured by CPUE, using standard trapping practices and historical trapping locations (Capelli and Magnuson 1983; Lodge et al. 1986; Garvey et al. 2003), with most lakes having 20–36 (a few small lakes had 12 and one large lake had 74) modiﬁed minnow traps per lake baited with 120 ± 10 g beef liver and set overnight, evenly spaced around the littoral zone of each lake in 1–2 m of water.
Between-lake comparisons
We limited a more focused between-lake survey to a subset of lakes for which we have long-term records of crayﬁsh composition through time; we compared the characteristics of lakes that contained only rusty
crayﬁsh (hereafter referred to as ‘‘rusty-only’’ lakes, n = 11) with those of lakes that contained both rusty and virile crayﬁsh (hereafter referred to as ‘‘rustyvirile’’ lakes, n = 8). For these 19 lakes, we had multiple trapping records (4–11 different sampling years) extending back at least 15 years (and in many cases [30 years); for each of these lakes, rusty crayﬁsh invaded early enough in the record to disperse completely around the lake perimeter. For each lake, the time necessary for lake-wide dispersal by rusty crayﬁsh was estimated from the lake’s perimeter (determined from maps published by the Department of Natural Resource in each state) and the invasion front speed measured in one of the study lakes (Trout Lake) (i.e., 0.7 km/year; Perry et al. 2001). With this criterion, we ensured that we were observing ﬁrmly established rusty crayﬁsh populations for which there had been ample time for impacts on native crayﬁsh to be manifest. For between-lake comparisons involving lakes containing only virile crayﬁsh (hereafter referred to as ‘‘virile-only’’ lakes, n = 6), we included only lakes that contained all three major littoral zone habitats (unvegetated cobble, unvegetated sand or soft organic sediments, and vegetated sediments). Only by screening our lakes in this way, could we meaningfully compare habitat use by virile crayﬁsh across the three categories of lakes. Many virile-only lakes have vegetation throughout the entire lake and therefore were excluded from our analysis (n = 9 lakes; Online Resource Table 1). To determine if time since invasion by rusty crayﬁsh might explain current species composition, we used a t test (this and subsequent statistical tests were run with Systat 12 except for the logistic regression described later, which was conducted in R 2.14.2) to compare the time since rusty crayﬁsh were initially detected between rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes. A shorter time since detection in the rusty-virile lakes compared to the rusty-only lakes would be consistent with a lag time between rusty establishment and time to virile crayﬁsh displacement. Because time since establishment of rusty crayﬁsh was not a sufﬁcient explanation for the pattern of crayﬁsh species composition among lakes (see ‘‘Results’’), we proceeded to test for other betweenlake differences related to persistence of the virile crayﬁsh. First, we examined crayﬁsh abundance in the presence or absence of congeners. Rusty and virile
crayﬁsh abundances as estimated as CPUE from trap catches in summer 2008 were compared in the rusty only, rusty-virile lakes, and virile-only lakes using t tests. Comparisons included (1) rusty crayﬁsh abundance between rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes, (2) virile crayﬁsh abundance between virile-only and rusty-virile lakes, and (3) rusty versus virile crayﬁsh abundance within just the rusty-virile lakes. A Bonferonni-adjusted critical value (a = 0.025) was used for the two non-independent comparisons: comparing rusty and virile trap catches, respectively, in rustyvirile lakes with trap catches from lakes where each species was found alone. Although traps can select for male crayﬁsh (Lodge et al. 1986), here we present data on total trap catch because lakes with low crayﬁsh abundances have locations where only female crayﬁsh were caught, and we wished to use all the information available with respect to species composition.Because traps overestimate relative rusty crayﬁsh abundance by a factor of two (Olsen et al. 1991), we divided all rusty trap in rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes by two (1991). Next we compared the abundance of the three major littoral zone habitats: unvegetated cobble (hereafter referred to as ‘‘cobble’’); unvegetated sand or soft organic sediments (hereafter referred to as ‘‘sand’’); and vegetated sediments between rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes. The abundance of habitats were determined by recording visual observations of sediment type and occurrence of vegetation at each crayﬁsh trapping site in summer 2008 and calculating the percentages of each habitat present. Habitats were characterized following the deﬁnitions of Lodge et al. (1998) and Garvey et al. (2003). We used a MANOVA to compare the percentage abundance of each of the three habitats available in rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes. The MANOVA was followed by three one-way ANOVA’s to further examine if there was a signiﬁcant difference in the individual habitats between the two types of lakes. Percent open and sand habitats were logit transformed to meet assumptions of ANOVA, percent cobble habitat did not need to be transformed. Because cobble is the only habitat not affected by rusty crayﬁsh it is a lake characteristic that can be used to develop management guidance (in contrast to sand and vegetation, which may be dynamic with respect to crayﬁsh composition and abundance, Lodge et al. 1994; Peters et al. 2008). Therefore, we used a logistic regression model to determine the relationship across
lakes between crayﬁsh composition (rusty-only vs. rusty-virile lakes) and the independent variable, the percent littoral zone that is cobble. For this analysis, we added seven lakes (6 rusty only and 1 rusty-virile) to the 19 lakes described above; the seven additional lakes have not been sampled as frequently as the 19 lakes, but their crayﬁsh composition is expected to be stable because rusty crayﬁsh have been in each long enough to have lake-wide dispersal and established populations. For the logistic regression, we calculated the adjusted count r2 and the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) or area under the curve. The adjusted count r2 provides a measure of the proportion of correct predictions, corrected for the most frequent value of the response variable. An ROC output c = 0.5 indicates the logistic curve is no better than predicting at random; an ROC c C 0.7 indicates a good ﬁt between the model and the data (Keller et al. 2006).
Within-lake comparisons
To look more closely at how habitat inﬂuences the ability of the two crayﬁsh species to coexist we compared crayﬁsh use of the three littoral zone habitats (cobble, sand, and vegetated) relative to the habitat’s availability when rusty and virile crayﬁsh were in the presence or absence of congeners using v2 tests on 2008 trapping data. Four independent tests were conducted: one each for rusty-only and virileonly lakes; one for rusty crayﬁsh in the rusty-virile lakes; and one for virile crayﬁsh in the rusty-virile lakes. Our null hypothesis was that the observed number of trap locations both rusty and virile crayﬁsh were found in each of the habitats would be no different than the expected number of those habitats in rusty-only, rusty-virile, and virile-only lakes. For individual lakes we determined the number of locations in each habitat the crayﬁsh used. Then for each set of lakes (virile-only, rusty-only, and rusty-virile) we compared the observed number of traps in each habitat crayﬁsh used (totaled for each lake type) with the expected number of traps in each habitat. The expected number for each habitat was calculated using the habitat percentages (determined from the habitat observations at each trap location, as described above) multiplied by the total number of locations in all three habitats the crayﬁsh were found.
In lakes with rusty crayﬁsh, virile crayﬁsh used vegetated habitats in greater proportion than their availability (see ‘‘Results’’). Therefore, at the withinlake scale, we focused on the patterns of coexistence of virile crayﬁsh with rusty crayﬁsh in vegetated habitats, and the potential drivers of those patterns. To quantify patterns of coexistence within the same rustyvirile lakes we used for our between-lake analyses above (n = 8), we used one-way ANOVAs blocked by lake to compare vegetation standing crop (g m-2), vegetation species richness (m-2), type of vegetation architecture, and sediment percent organic matter among sites where rusty and virile crayﬁsh coexisted, sites with only rusty crayﬁsh, and sites with only virile crayﬁsh. Crayﬁsh species composition, vegetation, and sediments were collected when vegetation was at peak biomass in July–August of 2006 and 2007. Sites were chosen from long-term trapping records where crayﬁsh had previously been found in vegetated habitats. A total of 56 vegetated sites were sampled in the eight lakes (5–9 sites/lake). At each site three crayﬁsh traps were set to determine crayﬁsh composition. After traps were emptied, aboveground vegetation was collected by hand (snorkeling) from three 0.5 m2 quadrats randomly thrown at depths between 1 and 2 m near each trapping location, and collected vegetation was frozen until processed. In the laboratory, vegetation was thawed, identiﬁed and sorted to species or genera (Borman et al. 1997; Crow et al. 2000), dried at 65 C to constant mass (*24–168 h), and weighed. Vegetation standing crop (g m-2) was natural log transformed to meet assumptions of ANOVA. Data in this and other analyses were back-transformed for presentation. We compared abundance of different architecture categories of all plant species that constituted[0.1 % of standing crop at any site (i.e., branching, tall/thickleaved, short, and thin-leaved; see Online Resource Table 2 for plant species category assignments) between types of crayﬁsh sites using one-way ANOVA blocked by lake. The percent standing crop (g m-2) of the thin, short, and branching type categories were ﬁfth root, sixth root, and cube root transformed, respectively, to meet assumptions of ANOVA. Because the four vegetation type comparisons were non-independent,we used a Bonferonniadjusted critical value (a = 0.0125).
Likewise we compared sediment composition among sites. Percent organic matter of sediments in each site was characterized by taking ﬁve to eight sediment cores at each trapping site using 60 ml syringes with cut off ends. Syringes were pushed 3 cm into the sediment and closed with a rubber stopper. Four sites were too rocky for cores to be taken. Sediments were transferred to whirl paks and frozen until processed. Samples were initially dried at 60 C for 24 h and then homogenized. One sub-sample (9.23 ± 6.8 g; mean ± SD) per sample of the homogenized sediments was dried at 60 C for another 48 h, and then ashed at 500 C for 2 h. To eliminate the inﬂuence clay particles might have on the ashed weight, the samples were re-wetted with deionized water to reintroduce the water of hydration in any clay particles (Steinman et al. 2006) and dried at 60 C to a constant weight. Data were natural log transformed to meet assumptions of ANOVA and compared using a one-way ANOVA blocked by lake. To assess within-lake differences in crayﬁsh mortality related to between-habitat differences in abiotic conditions and ﬁsh predation, we tethered rusty and virile crayﬁsh in unvegetated sand and vegetated habitats in Squirrel Lake (Oneida County, WI, USA) in late July through early August 2006. Rusty and virile crayﬁsh have coexisted in Squirrel Lake since at least 1987, but rusty crayﬁsh had most likely been in the lake much earlier (in 1987 the lakewide trap catch for rusty crayﬁsh was already high, 28 crayﬁsh trap-1; Lodge et al. 1998). We focused on predation in unvegetated sand compared to vegetated substrates to avoid the refuges from predation provided by cobble (Kershner and Lodge 1995). Male rusty and virile crayﬁsh with carapace length 21–25 mm were tethered at the sediment–water interface to wooden stakes using 0.4 cm long 4 lb monoﬁlament ﬁshing line attached to snap swivels glued to the crayﬁsh carapaces (similar to methods used by Didonato and Lodge 1993 and Kershner and Lodge 1995). All crayﬁsh were intermolt and had both chelae present when tethered. The crayﬁsh were staked one meter apart in six unvegetated sand sites and six vegetated sites around the lake. Vegetated sites were chosen where virile crayﬁsh had been consistently caught in previous surveys. Ten crayﬁsh of each species were tethered at each site, with half enclosed in cages with0.635 cm2 (1/4 inch2) mesh to protect them
from predation by ﬁsh or other crayﬁsh while the other half were exposed to both ambient abiotic conditions and ambient predation pressure. To compare mortality from abiotic conditions alone between species and habitats, we monitored caged crayﬁsh 3 times over 6 days, and compared the proportion of rusty and virile crayﬁsh that died with a repeated measures multi-way ANOVA. Molted crayﬁsh (6 virile and 2 rusty crayﬁsh) were not included in the mortality estimates. To compare mortality from predation between species and habitats, we compared the proportion mortality (i.e., missing) of un-caged rusty and virile crayﬁsh in unvegetated sand and vegetated habitats after 24 h using a multi-way ANOVA. Because our goal was to assess mortality from predation only, we did not include crayﬁsh that molted (1 virile crayﬁsh) or that were dead but still tethered (3 rusty and 3 virile crayﬁsh). No data transformations were needed for either of the analyses from the tethering experiment.

xresults
Snapshot survey
The snapshot survey of 54 lakes in northern Wisconsin and Michigan demonstrates rusty crayﬁsh are the only resident crayﬁsh species trapped in 44 % of the lakes; in 28 % of lakes, virile crayﬁsh are the only species found; and in the other 28 %, both rusty and virile crayﬁsh are found (Online Resource Table 1).
Between-lake comparisons
For the subset of 19 lakes with long-term data, the minimum amount of time that rusty crayﬁsh had occurred in the lake did not differ between rusty-only (23 ± 8 years, mean ± SE) and rusty-virile lakes (26 ± 9 years; range for both categories of lakes was 15–33 years) (t test: p = 0.57, df = 17, t = -0.59). In the rusty-only lakes for which we had data before and after rusty crayﬁsh establishment and in which virile crayﬁsh were extirpated (n = 5 lakes), the time from ﬁrst detection of rusty crayﬁsh to the time virile crayﬁsh became undetectable was 12.2 ± 1.3 years (mean ± SE). In our between-lake comparisons, signiﬁcantly higher rusty crayﬁsh trap catches occurred in rusty
only lakes (10.4 ± 1.8 crayﬁsh trap-1; mean ± SE) compared to rusty-virile lakes (3.8 ± 0.8 crayﬁsh trap-1) (Fig. 1; t test: df = 17, t = 3.02, p = 0.008). Trap catches of rusty crayﬁsh were also signiﬁcantly higher than those of virile crayﬁsh (0.4 ± 0.1 crayﬁsh trap-1) (Fig. 1; t test: df = 14, t = 4.22, p = 0.001) in rusty-virile lakes. Catches of virile crayﬁsh did not differ in rusty-virile lakes compared to virile-only lakes (0.9 ± 0.6 crayﬁsh trap-1) (Fig. 1; t test: df = 12, t = 0.92, p = 0.38). There was a signiﬁcant difference between the percent of habitats in rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes (MANVOA: Wilks-lambda df = 6,26, F = 9.628, p\0.001). A signiﬁcantly greater percentage of littoral zone lake bottom was occupied by cobble and sand habitats, and signiﬁcantly less by vegetated habitats, in rusty-only lakes compared to rusty-virile lakes (Fig. 2; one-way ANOVAs: cobble: df = 2,15, F = 37.02, p\0.001; sand: df = 2,15, F = 6.02, p = 0.012; vegetated: df = 2,15, F = 20.19, p\0.001). The logistic regression signiﬁcantly discriminated between rusty and rusty-virile lakes (Fig. 3; p = 0.042, adjusted count r2 = 0.70, c = 0.758) with no rusty-virile lakes having[33 % of the littoral zone being composed of cobble habitat.
Within-lake comparisons
At the within-lake scale, rusty and virile crayﬁsh use of habitats differed between single-species lakes and rusty-virile lakes (Fig. 4). In both virile-only and rusty-only lakes, virile and rusty crayﬁsh used all three habitats in accordance with the percent available (virile crayﬁsh, Fig. 4a: v2: df = 2, v2 = 5.10, p = 0.16; rusty crayﬁsh, Fig. 4b: v2: df = 2, v2 = 3.8, p = 0.3). However, when the two species coexisted in a lake, virile crayﬁsh used vegetated habitats disproportionately more than its availability and used cobble and sand habitats disproportionately less than their availability (Fig. 4c: v2: df = 2, v2 = 15.97, p = 0.0007). Rusty crayﬁsh on the other hand used cobble more and vegetated habitats less than their availability (Fig. 4c: v2: df = 2, v2 = 13.6, p = 0.002). Within lakes that manifest long-term coexistence of rusty and virile crayﬁsh, a signiﬁcant difference existed in vegetation standing crop (g m-2) among sites that differed in crayﬁsh species composition (Fig. 5a; oneway ANOVA: site type df = 2, F = 3.35, p = 0.044; lake block df = 7, F = 7.06, p\0.001). Speciﬁcally standing crop at rusty-only sites was less than half that at virile-only sites (Tukey’s multiple comparison: p = 0.04). Across all rusty-virile lakes, a total of 23 macrophyte species were sampled (Online Resource Table 2), with signiﬁcantly fewer species in rusty-only sites compared to rusty-virile sites (Tukey’s multiple comparison: p = 0.01) and virile-only sites (Tukey’s multiple comparison: p = 0.002) (Fig. 5b; one-way ANOVA: site type df = 2, F = 7.18, p = 0.002; lake
block df = 7, F = 4.71, p\0.001). No difference existed in the percent of each vegetation type across sites differing in crayﬁsh composition (OnlineResource Table 3 and Figure 1). The percentage sediment organic matter differed across sites with different crayﬁsh composition (Fig. 5c; one-way ANOVA: site type df = 2, F = 3.77, p = 0.031; lake block df = 7, F = 4.41, p = 0.033), and was approximately 3 times greater at virile-only sites compared to rusty-only (Tukey’s multiple comparison: p = 0.048) and rusty-virile sites (Tukey’s multiple comparison: p = 0.048). The mortality of caged rusty crayﬁsh did not differ from that of caged virile crayﬁsh, but both species suffered greater mortality in vegetated than on unvegetated sand over time with an over fourfold increase in mortality in vegetation compared to sand habitats after 6 days (Fig. 6; repeated measures ANOVA: habitat df = 1, F = 3.65, p = 0.07; crayﬁsh df = 1, F = 0.11, p = 0.74; time df = 2, F = 5.65, p = 0.007, time 9 habitat df = 2, F = 3.99, p = 0.026). In contrast, when exposed to predation, both rusty and virile crayﬁsh had greater mortality in unvegetated sand than in vegetated habitats, and mortality differed between species, with rusty crayﬁsh suffering signiﬁcantly lower mortality than virile crayﬁsh; no crayﬁsh by habitat interaction existed (Fig. 7; two-way ANOVA: habitat df = 1, F = 34.4, p\0.001; crayﬁsh df = 1, F = 4.6, p = 0.045; habitat 9 crayﬁsh df = 1, F = 0.04, p = 0.85).

xdiscussion
Expanding beyond past research on species coexistence, we used replicate invasions by rusty crayﬁsh into lakes previously occupied by the native virile crayﬁsh as a case study to deﬁne the multi-scale
habitat-mediated interactions that allow for native species persistence or displacement and to develop suggestions for management aimed at conserving the native species. Although previous studies document the lake-wide extirpation of virile crayﬁsh by rusty crayﬁsh (Capelli 1982; Olsen et al. 1991; Hill and Lodge 1999), results here demonstrate that there are lakes where the invasive rusty crayﬁsh coexist with
native virile crayﬁsh for many years, perhaps indefinitely. In fact, rusty crayﬁsh have been in both rustyonly and rusty-virile coexistence lakes for statistically similar amounts of time (approximately25 years).Not only have virile crayﬁsh persisted for a quarter century in many lakes, we also found that it took only 12 years for virile crayﬁsh to be displaced in lakes in which we currently detected only rusty crayﬁsh. Thus rusty crayﬁsh have been established in both rusty-only and rusty-virile lakes long enough to extirpate the native
crayﬁsh and yet have done so only in a subset of lakes. Additionally, not only have rusty crayﬁsh not extirpated the native crayﬁsh in coexistence lakes, they have also been unable to impact native virile crayﬁsh abundance as compared to uninvaded lakes. This case study illustrates a point made by Crooks (2005)—the importance of long-term data sets in assessing the impacts of invasive species on native populations. Finding long-term rusty and virile crayﬁsh coexistence in some lakes but not in others prompted us to examine the physical and biological differences between the two types of lakes and thereby allowed us to distinguish patterns useful for conservation management of the native crayﬁsh. In general there is signiﬁcantly more cobble and unvegetated sand habitats and signiﬁcantly less vegetated habitats in lakes where virile crayﬁsh have been extirpated compared to lakes where they coexist with rusty crayﬁsh. Given the propensity of rusty crayﬁsh to remove vegetation (Lodge et al. 1994; Rosenthal et al. 2006; Peters et al. 2008)it is not surprising that rusty-onlylakes have less vegetated habitats, and it is difﬁcult to know to what extent this is cause or effect of rusty crayﬁsh. On the other hand, we found that the percent littoral zone that is cobble, a habitat rusty crayﬁsh cannot affect, may provide a good indicator for developing management efforts. No lake that supports both rusty and virile crayﬁsh has percent cobble[33 %. Additionally, we found that crayﬁsh use of habitat differs in the presence and absence of congeners. In the absence of congeners, both rusty and virile crayﬁsh use the three habitats in proportion to their availability. However, as seen in other studies (Hill and Lodge 1994; Kershner and Lodge 1995), in the presence of congeners both species alter their use of habitat, with rusty crayﬁsh using cobble more and vegetated habitats less, and virile crayﬁsh using vegetated habitats more and cobble and sand habitats less. This study adds the important discovery, though, that there are vegetated sites where we ﬁnd only rusty or only virile crayﬁsh and sites with both species and that the physical characteristics of these sites differ, with vegetated habitats used by virile crayﬁsh having dense vegetation and organic matter. At the within-lake scale, the patterns of crayﬁsh occurrence relative to vegetation may be related to the impact of sediments and vegetation on abiotic conditions. Compared to unvegetated sites, sites with dense vegetation and lots of organic matter—like those sites
that appear to be a refuge for virile crayﬁsh—can develop low oxygen or anoxic conditions (Carpenter and Lodge 1986; Wetzel 2001), which may hinder crayﬁsh survival. Therefore, not only are virile crayﬁsh using vegetated sites more in the presence of rusty crayﬁsh, the type of vegetated sites they are using relative to those rusty crayﬁsh use have potentially more stressful abiotic conditions. We had expected that virile crayﬁsh would have greater survival compared to rusty crayﬁsh in low oxygen conditions of vegetation given that they have a lower metabolic rate (Lippson 1976). Instead we found no difference in mortality between the two crayﬁsh species when tethered at the sediment surface where oxygen is probably lowest, but that both species had greater mortality over time when exposed to only the abiotic conditions of the vegetated habitats compared to those in sand habitats. While our tethering treatments maximized mortality relative to natural situations in which crayﬁsh could move away from anoxic zones either by moving horizontally or vertically out of the vegetation, our results show that from an abiotic perspective, vegetated habitats are suboptimal habitats for both species. Crayﬁsh mortality due to abiotic conditions is much lower compared to mortality due to predators in vegetated habitats. For example, within the ﬁrst 24 h 20–40 % of crayﬁsh in vegetation were consumed compared to\10 % of crayﬁsh that died due to abiotic conditions. On the other hand, it appears that vegetated habitats, while having increased mortality due to abiotic conditions has signiﬁcantly reduced predation risk for both crayﬁsh species compared to sand habitats. While crayﬁsh susceptibility to predators has not been compared between the rusty and virile crayﬁsh in these two habitats previously, other tethering studies have similarly found virile crayﬁsh were more susceptible to predation than rusty crayﬁsh (Didonato and Lodge 1993) and mortality for rusty crayﬁsh was greater in sand compared to cobble or vegetated habitats (Kershner and Lodge 1995). Although predation may be greater for virile crayﬁsh, the overall reduction in predation in vegetated habitats which are extensively used by virile crayﬁsh compared to rusty crayﬁsh may allow the native crayﬁsh to persist in rusty-virile coexistence lakes. Overall, we found that the two crayﬁsh species coexist across the landscape at the between-lake scale and that there is within-lake habitat partitioning and
reduced predation pressure in vegetated habitats. Similar drivers for coexistence operate with other pairs of invasive and native species; amphipods (Hesselschwerdt et al. 2008; MacNeil et al. 2001a, b), squirrels(Bryce et al.2002), and mustelids (Bonesi and Macdonald 2004) coexist through habitat partitioning at multiple spatial scales. In addition to habitat partitioning, predation differences between habitats contribute to coexistence in amphipods (Palmer and Ricciardi 2005) and mosquitoes (Kesavaraju et al. 2008). Studies that examine predation as it relates to habitat (Palmer and Ricciardi 2005; Kesavaraju et al. 2008) or in the general context of invasive species (Celik et al. 2002; MacNeil et al. 2003; Bailey et al. 2006)have found that predation reduces abundances of the invasive congeners. In our study, however, we found that native virile crayﬁsh were more susceptible to predation in both habitats examined, but virile crayﬁsh may persist in rusty-virile coexistence lakes because rusty crayﬁsh do not prefer vegetated habitats and predation in general is lower in vegetated habitats. The ultimate outcome from species invasions is coexistence or extinction depending on the native species ability to use a niche that is not utilized by the introduced species (Priddis et al. 2009). MacDougall et al. (2009) suggests invasive species can have a ﬁtness advantage, but that niche differences can change the outcome of the invader’s advantage. In our study the native virile crayﬁsh use vegetated habitats that rusty crayﬁsh do not, and therefore persist with the invader when such habitats are available. In addition, coexistence is likely facilitated because rusty crayﬁsh do not reach high abundances in the rustyvirile lakes (2.05 ± 0.55 crayﬁsh trap-1, mean ? SE, n = 15; from lakes listed in Online Resource Table 1) compared to in rusty-only lakes (7.86 ± 1.37 crayﬁsh trap-1, n = 22), thereby reducing the impacts rusty crayﬁsh have on the native crayﬁsh and the aquatic vegetation. While we have examined many abiotic and biotic drivers that promote crayﬁsh coexistence, further research is needed to elucidate the speciﬁc mechanisms of coexistence. We hypothesize that the pattern we see in rusty-virile coexistence lakes is consistent with Roth et al.’s (2007) argument that heavily vegetated lakes can maintain a high abundance of vegetated habitats and low rusty crayﬁsh abundances through abundant Lepomis spp. populations that consume a large fraction of juvenile crayﬁsh.
Additionally, Lepomis spp. may be targeting juvenile rusty over virile crayﬁsh given that more active, aggressive and competitive species have been found to experience higher mortality with ﬁsh predators (Kellogg and Dorn 2012). On the other hand, rustyonly lakes with their high abundance of cobble habitats (i.e., good juvenile rusty crayﬁsh population growth environment; Garvey et al. 2003; Lodge and Hill 1994) may produce an overﬂow (via emigration) of rusty crayﬁsh that invade, feed in, and reduce vegetated habitats (Rosenthal et al. 2006). Reduction of vegetated habitats further limits nursery habitat for Lepomis spp. and refuges for virile crayﬁsh. However, in rusty-virile coexistence lakes, with small amounts of cobble, the paucity of the good juvenile nursery habitat for rusty crayﬁsh may keep the population lake-wide reduced and the emigration of rusty crayﬁsh (from cobble to vegetation) to a minimum so that they are unable to reduce the available vegetated habitats. Therefore, Lepomis spp. will stay abundant and as we have demonstrated, virile crayﬁsh populations have a refuge. To assess this hypothesis further, future studies should compare predation on small (10–18 mm) rusty and virile crayﬁsh (in our study we used medium sized crayﬁsh, 21–25 mm) in the three habitats. Additionally, further studies need to examine multiple ﬁsh species habitat use and their consumption of virile versus rusty crayﬁsh in the different habitats. While Roth et al. 2007 focused on Lepomis spp., there are many other species that can impact crayﬁsh populations (i.e., perch, bass, etc.; Garvey et al. 2003). Our results suggest that management efforts to conserve native crayﬁsh populations should target efforts to prevent the introduction of rusty crayﬁsh on lakes with[33 % cobble habitats prior to rusty crayﬁsh invasions. Lakes in which rusty crayﬁsh have recently invaded, but their impacts are not fully manifested and native crayﬁsh still persist, could also beneﬁt from efforts to protect vegetated habitats (where the virile crayﬁsh is advantaged). Techniques such as electric barriers, trapping, or food web manipulation may promote the persistence of vegetation and virile crayﬁsh. Although not feasible for large vegetated areas or lake-wide reductions in crayﬁsh populations, electric barriers can limit crayﬁsh abundance and therefore their ability to impact aquatic vegetation, invertebrates, and periphyton (Peters et al. 2008; Bobeldyk and Lamberti 2010). A more promising approach is to combine
crayﬁsh trapping and food web manipulation through increasing predatory ﬁsh populations (Hein et al. 2007; Peters 2010). Such an approach has effectively reduced lake-wide rusty crayﬁsh populations (Hein et al. 2007) and increased native virile crayﬁsh abundance (J. VanderZanden, personal communication). Both abiotic and biotic heterogeneity drive the conditions in lakes with or without crayﬁsh coexistence. Understanding the interactions between abiotic and biotic heterogeneity within lakes and across the landscape is important for future invasive and community ecological research as well as management. Long-term data, when available, is also beneﬁcial when developing effective species management programs. Ideally, prevention and early detection and rapid eradication of newly introduced species would occur before long-term data can be collected (Lodge et al. 2006). However, due to the often reactive nature of invasive species management (Peters and Lodge 2009), there are frequent opportunities to use long-term data and knowledge of community interactions to inform management efforts for prevention or mitigation (Mack 2005). In so doing, local species extirpations may be prevented.
