xabstract


With many ecosystems now supporting multiple nonnative species from

different trophic levels, it can be challenging to disentangle the net effects of invaders within

a community context. Here, we combined wetland surveys with a mesocosm experiment to

examine the individual and combined effects of nonnative fish predators and nonnative

bullfrogs on aquatic communities. Among 139 wetlands, nonnative fish (bass, sunfish, and

mosquitofish) negatively influenced the probability of occupancy of Pacific treefrogs

(Pseudacris regilla), but neither invader correlated strongly with occupancy by California

newts (Taricha torosa), western toads (Anaxyrus boreas), or California red-legged frogs (Rana

draytonii ). In mesocosms, mosquitofish dramatically reduced the abundance of zooplankton

and palatable amphibian larvae (P. regilla and T. torosa), leading to increases in nutrient

concentrations and phytoplankton (through loss of zooplankton), and rapid growth of

unpalatable toad larvae (through competitive release). Bullfrog larvae reduced the growth of

native anurans but had no effect on survival. Despite strong effects on natives, invaders did

not negatively influence one another, and their combined effects were additive. Our results

highlight how the net effects of multiple nonnative species depend on the trophic level of each

invader, the form and magnitude of invader interactions, and the traits of native community

members. xintroduction While many invasion biology studies focus on

interactions between a single invader and a single native

species, there is a growing need to address the net

consequences of multiple invasions within a community

context (Olden and Poff 2003). Continued homogenization

of the planetís biota has increased the number of

nonnative species in many communities, a trend that is

especially evident in aquatic ecosystems (Ricciardi and

MacIsaac 2011). Yet the consequences of multiple

invasions within native communities are challenging to

disentangle because invaders can interact with one

another, affect native species in highly variable ways,

and cause subtle indirect effects (Simberloff and Von

Holle 1999, Grosholz 2005). The net community-level

effects of multiple invaders depend on both the trophic

level of each invader and how they affect one another

(Levin et al. 2002). If co-occurring invaders occupy

different trophic levels (e.g., a primary consumer and

secondary consumer), their combined effects could be

reduced if one invader consumes the other, or amplified

if the invasive predator indirectly releases the invasive

consumer from competition with natives (Grosholz

2005). Disentangling interactions among multiple invaders

within native communities becomes even more

challenging when nonnative species occur simultaneously

with other types of environmental change, which can

facilitate invaders or directly alter community structure

(MacDougall and Turkington 2005).

In the western United States, American bullfrogs

(Lithobates catesbeianus [ºRana catesbeiana]) and nonnative

fish (i.e., sunfish, bass, and mosquitofish) are

common wetland invaders that frequently co-occur in

human-modified habitats, making it challenging to

determine their individual roles in structuring native

communities. Various studies have shown the potential

for nonnative fish and bullfrogs to negatively influence

native aquatic species through predation and competition

(e.g., Kupferberg 1997, Goodsell and Kats 1999),

although only two studies have simultaneously examined

impacts of both nonnative fish and bullfrogs on a

native species (Kiesecker and Blaustein 1998, Lawler et

al. 1999). Understanding the combined effects of

nonnative fish and bullfrogs is particularly important

in light of evidence for multi-invader facilitation within

this system. Sunfish (Lepomis spp.) can indirectly

facilitate bullfrogs by preying on predators of amphibians,

which occurs in the native ranges of both taxa

(Werner and McPeek 1994) and in their introduced ranges in the western United States (Adams et al. 2003).

Bullfrog larvae are relatively unpalatable to most fish

predators (Kruse and Francis 1977, Woodward 1983)

and the indirect positive effects of fish on bullfrogs

outweigh any direct negative effects. Less clear, however,

is how fish and bullfrogs, alone and in combination,

influence entire communities of native species, as singletaxon

focused studies can often omit important indirect

effects mediated through food web changes.

To better understand the direct and indirect effects of

nonnative fish and bullfrogs on native aquatic communities,

we combined field surveys of 139 wetlands with a

mesocosm experiment designed to assess the mechanisms

underlying aquatic interactions between native

and nonnative species (see Plate 1). Our aims were to (1)

evaluate how nonnative bullfrogs and fish (centrarchids

and mosquitofish) influence the site occupancy of native

amphibian taxa (Pseudacris regilla, Anaxyrus [ºBufo]

boreas, Taricha torosa, and Rana draytonii ) and (2)

understand the direct and indirect mechanisms by which

these invaders influence native aquatic communities in

an experimental setting. While site occupancy of

amphibians in ponds will depend on a myriad of factors

influencing all amphibian life stages, our experiment

focused on how invaders influenced the aquatic larvae of

native amphibians, for which we predicted that fish and

bullfrogs would have strong effects. We hypothesized

that in the mesocosm experiment the invasive predator

(mosquitofish) would decrease densities of palatable

native species (amphibians and zooplankton), while the

invasive herbivore (bullfrog larvae) would decrease

growth of native grazers (anuran larvae and snails; see

interaction web in Appendix A for detailed predictions).

Because bullfrog larvae and mosquitofish occupy

different trophic levels and are expected to have neutral

direct effects on one another (Woodward 1983), we also

suspected that the combined effects of both invaders

would be additive. 


xmethods

 Field surveys.óBetween May and July of 2009, we

surveyed 139 ponds in the San Francisco Bay Area of

California (Contra Costa, Alameda, Santa Clara, and

San Mateo counties). Because nonnative fish and

bullfrogs cannot become established in temporary

ponds, we restricted our analysis to permanent ponds

(Adams 2000). To detect fish and amphibians, we used a

combination of visual encounter surveys (VES) around

the pond margins and standardized net sweeps with D

nets (1.4 mm mesh, 2600-cm2 opening) every 3ñ5 m

around the perimeter. In 67 ponds, we also conducted

three to four collections using a seine net (4 mm mesh, 1

32 m net) to sample the deeper waters. We identified all

amphibians and fish captured before releasing them

back into the pond. We defined sites as ëëoccupiedíí only

if breeding activity was detected (i.e., presence of eggs,

larvae, or recent metamorphs). We also recorded pond

elevation and pond area, the percentage of the shoreline

that was vegetated (as opposed to bare), the number of

trees within 15 m of the pond, and measured water

turbidity with a turbidometer (LaMotte, Chestertown,

Maryland, USA).

Occupancy models.óWe used single-season occupancy

models (MacKenzie et al. 2002) to examine how the

presence of nonnative species influenced the occupancy

of four native amphibians (P. regilla, A. boreas, T.

torosa, and R. draytonii ). Occupancy models account for

imperfect species detection and estimate both the

probability of occurrence at a site (w) and the

probability of detection conditional on presence ( p).

We used the three different survey methods (netsweeps,

visual encounter surveys, and seines) as repeat observations

within each model. Although a multi-method

occupancy model exists, the one-species, single-season

model provided similar results with more reliable model

convergence. Our models for probability of occupancy

(w) of each amphibian were variations of a global model

that included separate covariates for the presence of

bullfrogs, presence of fish (mosquitofish and centrarchids),

pond elevation, pond surface area, shoreline

vegetation, and tree density. Detection probability ( p)

was modeled with a general equation that included the

same covariates used to model occupancy probability,

with the addition of survey type, survey date (days since

first survey), water temperature (8C), and water turbidity.

Continuous covariates were standardized to have a

mean of zero and standard deviation of one and the

independent variables were tested for collinearity (all r ,

0.7; Quinn and Keough 2002). All occupancy analyses

were conducted with the program PRESENCE (available

online).4

We used a model-selection approach (Burnham and

Anderson 2010) to determine the most important

covariates in predicting amphibian occupancy. We

tested all possible combinations of the six covariates in

the occupancy equation (64 models per species), which

included a model with constant occupancy probability

between sites (w(.)). We assessed the fit of the global

models for each species by generating 10 000 parametric

bootstraps using the goodness-of-fit test in PRESENCE.

Data for three of the four species demonstrated overdispersion

(àc . 1), so we ranked models using QAIC and

inflated standard errors by

ffiffiffi

àc

p

(Burnham and Anderson

2010). We then used the most supported models for each

amphibian species (DQAIC , 2) to generate modelaveraged

estimates of occupancy (w) and coefficients (b)

of the six parameters in the top occupancy models (B.

Mitchell, unpublished spreadsheets).

Experimental manipulation.óWe conducted a 2 3 2

factorial experiment manipulating the presence of

bullfrog larvae and mosquitofish in outdoor mesocosms

(378 L) maintained at the Hopland Research and

Extension Center, California, USA. Each treatment was replicated five times, for a total of 20 mesocosms.

Mesocosms were established using standard techniques

(see Appendix B). After allowing communities of algae,

zooplankton, and snails (Helisoma sp.) to establish, we

added 15 Pacific treefrog (P. regilla) tadpoles, 15 western

toad (A. boreas) tadpoles, and 10 California newt (T.

torosa) larvae. Native amphibians were collected locally

as embryos and were hatched in the laboratory.

Amphibians were matched for size (snoutñvent length,

SVL) and developmental stage before being randomly

assigned to mesocosms (Appendix B). To the invader

treatments we added three locally collected second-year

bullfrog tadpoles (Lithobates catesbeianus) and/or five

adult mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis; three females, two

males). Densities were chosen to lie within the ranges

observed in the field. We focused on aquatic invaders

and amphibian larval stages, both because we expected

strong interactions and because predatory and competitive

interactions between metamorphosed bullfrogs and

native amphibians have been previously documented

(Kiesecker and Blaustein 1998, Pearl et al. 2004).

As amphibians began to metamorphose (4 weeks), we

destructively sampled the mesocosms and recorded the

SVL, wet mass, developmental stage (Gosner 1960),

presence/absence of injuries on each individual and the

combined dry mass for each species. For mosquitofish,

we recorded the number of fish removed from each

mesocosm and their lengths. We also enumerated all

snails and measured their combined dry mass. At the

beginning and end of the experiment, we analyzed water

samples for total nitrogen, total phosphorus, and total

carbon (procedures available online).5 We measured

phytoplankton abundance indirectly as chlorophyll

fluorescence using a fluorometer (Turner Designs,

Sunnyvale, California, USA) and quantified zooplankton

density based on samples collected with a tube

sampler (70 cm in length 3 5 cm in diameter, five

combined samples per mesocosm).

Mesocosm data analysis.óSurvival (0 vs. 1) of native

amphibians nested within mesocosms was analyzed with

a generalized linear mixed-effects model with binomial

errors using the lme4 package in R (Zuur et al. 2009).

We specified bullfrogs, mosquitofish, and their interaction

as fixed effects, and mesocosm as a random effect.

For all other response variables, analyses were conducted

on mesocosm means. Two-way MANOVA with

mosquitofish and bullfrogs as independent variables

were used to analyze mesocosm data on response

variables of native amphibian species (Gosner stage,

SVL, and individual wet mass), snails (log-transformed

abundance and wet mass), zooplankton, and phyto-plankton (density of Daphnia and relative phytoplankton

fluorescence). We used repeated-measures MANOVA

to analyze effects of invaders on nutrients in the

water column. One-way MANOVAs were used to test

for effects of bullfrogs on mosquitofish (total number of

offspring and juvenile length) and of mosquitofish on

bullfrogs (SVL and wet mass). Significant MANOVAs

were analyzed with Bonferroni-adjusted univariate

ANOVAs to determine which variables were responsible

for significant main effects. To aid in interpretation of

differences in multiple response variables between

experimental treatments, we used the lavaan package

in R to generate a structural equation model (SEM) that

included bullfrogs and mosquitofish as exogenous

variables that were either directly or indirectly linked

to nutrients in the water, native amphibians, snails,

zooplankton and phytoplankton (for detailed SEM

methods see Appendix C; lavaan package available

online).6 

xresultsField surveys.óWe detected nonnative bullfrogs at

23%, and nonnative fish at 18% (of which 12% contained

centrarchids and 8% contained mosquitofish) of sampled

ponds. Model-averaged estimates from the top occupancy

models (DQAIC , 2) indicated occupancy

estimates of 90% for Pacific treefrogs, 67% for California

newts, 57% for California red-legged frogs, and

35% for western toads. Nonnative fish presence was the

most important predictor of treefrog occupancy, with all

five top models including this covariate (see Appendix E:

Table E1 for a full list of top models and associated

statistics for each species). Fish presence was the only

covariate of Pacific treefrog occupancy to have a

coefficient with a 95% confidence interval that excluded

zero (Table 1; model-averaged b º 2.24; 95% CI º

4.16 to 0.32). Four models were well supported for

western toad occupancy, and the most important

covariates (Table 1) included a positive effect of surface

area (model-averaged b º 1.05; 95% CI º 0.02 to 2.08)

and a negative effect of vegetation (model-averaged b º

1.12; 95% CI º1.95 to 0.28). Twelve models were

well supported for newt occupancy, although the

second-best model did not include any covariates of

occupancy probability (w(.)) and none of the modelaveraged

coefficients had a 95% confidence interval that

excluded zero (Table 1). The only strong predictor of

California red-legged frog occupancy was a positive

effect of surface area, which was included in all six top models (Table 1; model-averaged b º 1.41; 95% CI º

0.15 to 2.68).

Mesocosm experiment.óMosquitofish reduced treefrog

survival from 74% to 7% (GLMM, Zº7.04, P ,

0.001) and newt survival from 97% to 6% (GLMM, Zº

6.08, P , 0.001), but had no effect on toad survival

(Fig. 1A). Surviving treefrogs from mosquitofish treatments

also developed more slowly and were smaller than

frogs from fishless treatments, despite the lower overall

density of conspecifics (Fig. 1B; ANOVA, stage F3,12 º

16.80, Pº0.001; SVL F3,12º16.61, Pº0.002; wet mass

F3,12 º 13.92, P º 0.003). Among surviving native

amphibians in the treatments with mosquitofish, 44% of

the treefrogs, 34% of the toads, and 17% of the newts

displayed injuries (missing tail or limb elements;

Appendix D: Fig D1). No amphibians raised in fishless

treatments displayed abnormalities. Nevertheless, toads

developed more rapidly in the presence of mosquitofish

(Fig. 1B; ANOVA, F3,16 º 7.04, P º 0.017) and their

combined dry mass was higher in mosquitofish treat-ments (ANOVA, F3,16 º 5.22, P º 0.036). The SEM

analysis (Appendix C: Fig. C1) suggested that the

enhanced growth of toads in mosquitofish treatments

was an indirect effect; mosquitofish strongly reduced

treefrog biomass (standardized path coefficientº0.95)

while treefrogs had a moderate negative effect on toad

biomass (standardized path coefficient º 0.35). Bullfrogs

reduced treefrog developmental stage (Fig. 1B;

ANOVA, F3,12 º 7.59, P º 0.017), toad developmental

stage, and size (Fig. 1B; ANOVA, stage F3,16 º 35.63, P

, 0.001; SVL F3,16 º 18.52, P º 0.001; wet mass F3,16 º

13.45, Pº0.002), but not newt size or the survival of any

natives. The SEM (Fig. C1) indicated that the relative

strength of the negative effect of bullfrogs on toad

biomass (standardized path coefficient º 0.90) was

considerably higher than that of bullfrogs on treefrog

biomass (standardized path coefficientº0.33). We did

not detect a mosquitofish-by-bullfrog interaction on any

response variables.

Invaders also had direct and indirect effects on

plankton and nutrients. In the presence of mosquitofish,

zooplankton (Daphnia spp.) were virtually undetectable

(Fig. 1C; ANOVA, F3,16º44.58, P , 0.001) and phytoplankton

fluorescence was about three times higher than

in treatments lacking mosquitofish (Fig. 1C; ANOVA,

F3,16º10.64, Pº0.005). The SEM provided evidence for

a strong positive indirect effect of mosquitofish on

phytoplankton (mosquitofish to Daphnia, standardized

path coefficient º 0.99; Daphnia to phytoplankton,

standardized path coefficientº0.85). Mosquitofish also

enhanced total nitrogen and total phosphorus (Fig. 1D;

repeated-measures ANOVA, nitrogen F1,16º19.46, P ,

0.001; Fig. 1E; phosphorus F1,16 º 5.92, P º 0.027), but

there were no significant differences in carbon (Fig. 1F).

Finally, the SEM suggested a moderate negative effect of

bullfrogs on snail biomass (Fig. C1; standardized path

coefficientº0.41).

In contrast to their strong effects on native species,

invaders did not significantly affect one another.

Mosquitofish reproduced within mesocosms during the

course of the experiment but neither the number of

offspring nor the length of juvenile fish were affected by

bullfrogs (MANOVA, Wilksí kº0.759, F2,6º0.951, Pº

0.438). The mean number of fish removed from

mosquitofish and mosquitofish plus bullfrog treatments

was 30 6 4.84 (mean 6 SE) and 21 6 2.97, respectively.

Similarly, mosquitofish did not affect bullfrog SVL or

wet mass (MANOVA, Wilksí kº0.907, F2,7º0.36, Pº

0.711), and all bullfrogs survived the experiment. 


xdiscussion
Increases in the diversity, abundance, and rate of

spread of introduced species in freshwater ecosystems

underscore the need to address the impacts of aquatic

invaders within complex communities composed of

multiple native and nonnative species (Ricciardi and

MacIsaac 2011). By combining field surveys and

mechanistic experiments, we evaluated impacts of

multiple invaders within a community context and

found both direct changes in community structure as

well as subtler, indirect effects mediated by native

community members. The effects of nonnative mosquitofish

and bullfrogs depended on traits of the native

species, including palatability to the invasive predator

and dietary overlap with the invasive herbivore. Despite

their strong effects on native species, the invaders had no

significant effects on one another, and their combined

effects on native communities were additive.

Field data from California wetlands indicated that

nonnative fish (centrarchids and mosquitofish) negatively

influenced the probability of occupancy of Pacific

treefrogs, but that neither invader had strong effects on

occupancy of the other native amphibians. The effects of

fish on Pacific treefrog occupancy are consistent with the

predatory effects of mosquitofish in our experiment, and

with previous field surveys in central California (Fisher

and Shaffer 1996). While mosquitofish sharply reduced

newt survival in mesocosms, the occupancy models did

not show a strong negative association between these

taxa. This suggests that amphibian survival across

multiple life stages (i.e., egg, larvae, juvenile, adult)

and at varying spatial scales (i.e., pond, landscape, and

region) is important in nature. While nonnative fish

probably reduce survival of newt larvae in ponds,

survival of their terrestrial life stages may be more

important in maintaining stable populations (Biek et al.

2002). We also acknowledge that additional factors

outside the scope of our field data may influence

amphibian distribution in the study region (e.g., land

use, habitat fragmentation, road density, patterns of

amphibian disease) and that factors protecting amphibian

larvae from predation may have been omitted from

our mesocosm experiment (e.g., additional alternative

prey, increased habitat complexity).

The mesocosm results added mechanistic insight into

species interactions that were likely to occur within the

surveyed ponds. Invasive predators exhibited strongly

lethal effects on palatable amphibian larvae (treefrogs

and newts), which far outweighed growth-related effects

of bullfrogs. These findings add further experimental

evidence to document the predatory effects of mosquitofish

on amphibians (Gamradt and Kats 1996, Goodsell

and Kats 1999). In contrast, unpalatable toad larvae

exhibited no decrease in survival in the presence of

mosquitofish, but did show strong reductions in growth

in the presence of bullfrog larvae. The lack of predation

on toads is likely due to chemical protection, which

often protects bufonid larvae from fish (Kruse and

Stone 1984). The sublethal injuries caused by mosquitofish

also support the role of predators in contributing to

missing-limb abnormalities in amphibians (Bowerman et

al. 2010). Finally, newts were unaffected by bullfrog

larvae, likely because direct competition for food

resources and indirect effects were minimal (i.e.,

bullfrogs did not deplete resources that altered newt

prey availability). We must also note that mesocosm experiments simplify natural communities, which are

inherently complex. By isolating species of interest, we

gained greater mechanistic understanding of their

interactions, but many native species (and effects of

their interactions) were omitted as a result.

Our study revealed an indirect positive effect of one

invader on a native species. Western toads were larger

and metamorphosed more quickly in the presence of

mosquitofish. This positive association was evident even

though many toad larvae from mosquitofish treatments

showed injuries consistent with fish attacks (Appendix

D: Fig. D1). Our SEM suggests this result is an indirect

positive effect of mosquitofish that occurred due to

reductions in abundance of treefrog tadpoles, which are

competitors of toad tadpoles. Mosquitofish sharply

decreased treefrog survival and treefrogs had a negative

effect on toad biomass in the SEM. The SEM did not

support an alternative mechanism, whereby the increased

toad growth was due to enhanced phytoplankton

abundance in the presence of mosquitofish and we

are unaware of a direct interaction where mosquitofish

would promote toad tadpoles. There is evidence to

suggest that nonnative fish also promote toads in nature;

Welsh et al. (2006) found western toads to be six times

more abundant in the presence of nonnative salmonids

in lake and pond habitats in northern California. To

date, there are relatively few studies documenting this

type of facilitation of native species by invaders through

competitive release (e.g., Grosholz 2005). One interesting

example involves nonnative golden eagles, which

prey upon native foxes in the Channel Islands, leading to

the competitive release of native skunks (Roemer et al.

2002).

Results of the mesocosm study also suggested that

invasive predators can influence primary production and

nutrient cycling. Consistent with other reports, mosquitofish

strongly reduced zooplankton within mesocosms

(Ning et al. 2009), leading to sharp increases in

phytoplankton (see SEM). Relative phytoplankton

fluorescence in mosquitofish treatments was about three

times greater in treatments lacking mosquitofish. Including

links from nutrients (TDN and TDP) to

phytoplankton decreased model fit in the SEM, suggesting

the top-down effect of zooplankton loss explained

changes in phytoplankton (Appendix C), which

has also been reported in nature (Nagdali and Gupta

2002). We also observed increases in total nitrogen and

phosphorus within mosquitofish treatments, possibly

due to direct excretion of nutrients by mosquitofish

(Schaus et al. 1997). We note, however, that the

observed effects on nutrients, phytoplankton, and

zooplankton occurred over a short time span in

mesocosms with a relatively small water volume and

simplified community. Of particular note is that our

mesocosms did not contain submerged macrophytes,

which are known to provide refuge for zooplankton

from predatory fish (Schriver et al. 1995). Further

research into how multiple aquatic invaders influence

native communities and ecosystem processes, especially

whole-ecosystem manipulations, will yield valuable

insights into how the effects reported here ëëscale-upíí

to real wetlands.