xabstract


Patagonia fishless ponds have been stocked with fishes for recreational purposes since

early in the 20th century. We carried out a summer plankton sampling in 18 Patagonian

lakes; 12 fishless, 5 with introduced fishes and 1 with endemic fish fauna. The lakes are situated

on a latitudinal gradient from 39 to 49S. Zooplankton and phytoplankton composition,

phytoplankton relative abundance, and zooplankton body size and mouthpart

morphology were analyzed. Results showed differences between lakes with and without

fishes; in the presence of fish zooplankton size spectrum tended to be narrower because

of the disappearance of Daphnia and large centropagid copepods. Zooplankton composition

changed: centropagid species richness decreased and rotifers dominated. Contrarily, in

fishless lakes 3 or 4 centropagid species, differing markedly in body size and exploiting different

food niches, were observed co-occurring. These changes in zooplankton seemed to

cascade down to phytoplankton. Fish introduction increased the phytoplankton similarity

in lakes even belonging to different basins in a latitudinal gradient. Indeed, cyanobacteria

dominated only in lakes with introduced fishes. Probably the elimination of Daphnia

favored cyanobacteria proliferation due to nutrient rebalance. As a consequence, water

quality decreases and the value of sport fisheries is reduced. Fish introduction in Patagonia

is a practice that should be re-evaluated by governments and NGOs due to its potentially

negative impact on lakes and local economies. xintroduction


Biological invasions have long been recognized as a threat to

the biodiversity since invaders may alter both direct and indirect

interactions among populations and even induce trophic

cascades (Simon and Townsend, 2003). The understanding of

population biology of invaders and the effect of introduced

species is necessary for constructing a robust theory of invasion

biology that would provide a basis for rational decisions

about species introduction and eradication efforts (Townsend,

1996; Simberloff, 2003).

The introduction of salmonids in lakes and rivers of Patagonia,

the southernmost region of South America, started

early in the 20th century (Macchi et al., 1999). In Argentinean

Patagonia, rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) is the most

widely distributed salmonid species (Pascual et al., 2002). In

addition, during the 60s, native fishes (Percichthys trucha and

Odonthestes bonariensis) were also introduced to fishless lakes (Marcoli¥n et al., 1968; Quiro¥ s and Baigu¥n, 1986; Quiro¥ s, 1990).

Unfortunately, very few data were available on food web

structure before these practices began. The Patagonian Plateau

region is unfavorable for lake development (Iriondo,

1989); thus the few existing lakes belong to isolated basins.

Visual planktivores can change size structure and species

composition of freshwater zooplankton communities (Gliwicz

and Pijanowska, 1989). Predation on native fauna by

introduced trout frequently causes ecological changes,

including the elimination of amphibian and reptile populations

(Tyler et al., 1998; Knapp, 2005) and changes in

zooplankton and benthic macroinvertebrate species composition

and size structure (Anderson, 1980; Knapp et al., 2001).

Previous studies in Patagonian lakes have referred to a strong

effect on zooplankton body size, with a narrower spectrum in

lakes with fish introductions (Modenutti and Balseiro, 1994).

Also fishes may compete for food with avian fauna, thus flamingos

are usually absent or scarce in Andean lakes with fish

(Hurlbert et al., 1986). Recently, negative effects on swan and

coot populations were observed in a Patagonian lake with

introduced fishes (Ortubay et al., 2006). On the other hand,

fish predation can exert a trophic cascade down to lower trophic

levels as they can indirectly increase phytoplankton biomass

by reducing zooplankton grazing pressure (Carpenter

and Kitchell, 1993; Attayde and Hansson, 2001; Khan et al.,

2003).

Zooplankton assemblages in Patagonian Plateau lakes are

dominated by endemic calanoid copepods, particularly centropagids

of the genera Boeckella and Parabroteas (Modenutti

and Balseiro, 1994; Die¥guez and Balseiro, 1998; Menu-Marque

et al., 2000). Twelve species of Boeckella are reported in these

shallow lakes that represent reservoirs of the biodiversity of

this assemblage (Menu-Marque et al., 2000). The regional

distinctiveness of biological communities reflects historical

factors that have restricted species ranges via physical isolation,

ecological interactions and evolutionary diversification

(Huston, 1994). Biotic exchange with the introduction of

non-indigenous species has been dramatically accelerated

by humans in historical times being an important mechanism

of biotic homogenization (Olden and Poff, 2004). Biotic

homogenization is an increase in species similarity among a

set of communities through time (Beissner et al., 2003). Based

on these ideas we hypothesize that fish introduction in Patagonia

leads to increase plankton similarity as a consequence

of the loss of large species due to the introduction of visual

predators. Thus, the main objective of the present study is

to analyze Patagonian planktonic food web structure of fishless

lakes and lakes with introduced fishes along a latitudinal

gradient from 39 to 49S.

xmethods

 The study was carried out in 18 Patagonian lakes located between

38580ñ48510S and 68200ñ71030W. The climate is dry

and cold with strong westerly winds, resulting in severe aeolian

erosion (Iriondo, 1989). The lakes belong to 4 areas: [1]

Northern area of Laguna Blanca and surroundings (39S and

70W), [2] Central area of the Nothofagus forest-Patagonian

steppe ecotone (41S and 71W), [3] Central steppe area (41S

and 68W) and [4] Southern area in Santa Cruz province

(49S and 72W) (Fig. 1). The region is a steppe with smallleaved

shrubs and the mean annual precipitation varies between

400 mm in [2], 200 mm in [1] and [4] and less than

150 mm in [3] (Paruelo et al., 1998). The lakes are shallow,

and in most cases the maximum depths are less than 12 m.

Carrilaufquen Chica has a maximum depth of 8m, Carrilaufquen

Grande 8.5 m, Nò e-Luan 10 m, Del Mie 2m, Laguna Blanca

12 m, Jabo¥n 4mand El Chancho and El Burro 2 m; the other

lakes lack bathymetric maps. On the contrary, Lake Cardiel is

a deep lake with a maximum depth of 76 m. Twelve of the

studied lakes are fishless. The other six lakes have fishes,

Lake Del Mie has Galaxias platei, a native fish species (Milano,

2003), and the other five lakes contain introduced fish species.

Carrilaufquen Grande, Carrilaufquen Chica, Nò e Luan and

Cardiel lakes were stocked with salmonids, mainly O. mykiss

during the first half of 20th century (Pascual et al., 2002). Laguna

Blanca was a fishless lake until the 60s when the indigenous

fishes Percichthys colhuapiensis, P. trucha and exotic

salmonids were introduced. Lakes with fish will hereafter be

indicated in bold letters.Fieldwork was carried out during summers (February) 2001ñ

2004, and the lakes were sampled at midday. All lakes were

sampled in at least two different summer seasons. Zooplankton

samples were collected with a 25 cm diameter and 55 lmmesh-

plankton net and two or more horizontal tows of 10m were made in the central area of the lake. The tows were

pooled into one sample and preserved in 4% formalin solution.

Water samples for phytoplankton quantification were

collected subsuperficially (0.5m depth) with a Ruttner bottle

from 10 lakes, five with fishes (Blanca, Carrilaufquen Grande,

Carrilaufquen Chica, Nò e Luan and Del Mie lakes) and five

without fish (El Burro, Jabo¥ n, Volca¥n 2, 3 and 4). Unfortunately,

in the case of Lake Cardiel the phytoplankton samplewas collected

with a net mesh of 55 lm, thus we only obtained net

phytoplankton. Phytoplankton samples were preserved in

acid Lugol solution, and were quantified under an inverted

microscope following Utermo® hl (1958). Algal cells were identified

to the lowest possible taxonomic category (genus or species),

then were assigned to the following groups:

Cyanophyceae, Chlorophyceae (Chlorococcales), Cryptophyceae

+ flagellated Chrysophyceae (<20 lm), and others

(mainly Bacillariophyceae, Chlorophyceae Zygnematales and

Euglenophyceae). Biovolumes were calculated applying Sun

and Liu (2003) geometric models based on measurements of

at least 30 algal cells of each species. In the analysis of phytoplankton

biovolume the order Zygnematales was considered

separately (Chlorophyceae Zygnematales) due to their high

relative contribution to total biovolume.

In the laboratory, zooplankton species were identified and

measured. Crustaceans were quantified under stereomicroscope

in 5 ml Bogorov chambers, and rotifers in 1 ml Sedgwickñ

Rafter chambers under a direct microscope. At least 60

individuals of each abundant species and all individuals of

rare species were measured under an Olympus SZX9 stereomicroscope

at 12ñ50∑ magnification. Body size was considered

as follows: for cladocerans, linear dimension from the

top of the head shield to the base of the caudal spine; for

copepods, the total body length from the anterior extremity

of cephalothorax to the tips of the furcal rami (without setae); and for rotifers, the total body of lorica length without spines.

The proportion of each species or size within species (different

instars of copepods) was estimated for each sample.

In order to study the relationship between centropagid

mouthpart structure and feeding mode, several adult females

and males of each species were analyzed. Mandibles and

maxillipeds were dissected and observed under a direct

microscope Olympus BX50 and images were digitalized using

an image analyzer (Image Pro, Media Cybernetics). Mandible

(Md) as the total length of the cutting edge, and total length

of maxillipeds (Mxp), were measured.

Levels of significance of differences were tested with parametric

and non-parametric tests (ANOVA, and MannñWhitney

test). Homoscedasticity and normality were tested when

required. All statistical analyses were performed with SigmaStat

3.01 statistical package. The similarity between different

lakes was estimated through a hierarchical cluster

analysis based on binary data (presenceñabsence) in the case

of crustacean zooplankton species. In the case of phytoplankton,

the relative abundance of the different groups was estimated

in the same way. Biota distance was estimated

through Euclidean distances and clusters were constructed

with an unweighted pair-group average (UPGMA). Analyses

were performed with Statistica.

xresults In the whole data set of 18 Patagonian lakes we recorded a

broad spectrum of zooplankton sizes, ranging from 0.1 mm

for the rotifer Keratella cochlearis and copepod nauplii, to

6.3 mm for the centropagid copepod Parabroteas sarsi adults.

The complete spectrum was attained only in fishless lakes

(Fig. 2). Lakes with fishes showed a narrower size distribution,

with the dominance of small-sized zooplankton (less than

1 mm). We observed significant differences between fish and

fishless lakes in the number of classes over 1mm with values

larger than 0 (MannñWhitney, P < 0.001). Among lakes with

fish, Del Mie is the only lake with endemic fish fauna,

whereas the others were stocked with a mixed assemblage

including exotic and native fishes with different success

(Table 1). Considering the time of introduction, Lake Laguna

Blanca represents the most recently manipulated lake, while

both Carrilaufquen lakes represent the least recently manipulated

ones. Regarding fish fauna and time of introduction in

each lake (Table 1), no remarkable differences in size spectra

were observed between shallow lakes with native (Del Mie)

and introduced fishes (Fig. 2).

Zooplankton community structure differed markedly between

lakes with and without fishes. Fishless lakes were

dominated by crustaceans, in particular calanoid copepods.

A total of 8 centropagid species were recorded including the

large P. sarsi and 7 Boeckella. All fishless lakes, except NF1, contained

at least two or more species of co-existing centropagid

copepods (Fig. 3, see numbers at the bottom of the figure).

Most of these lakes contained the largest copepod, P. sarsi,

since it was present in 8 of the 13 fishless environments sampled.

On the contrary, each lake with fishes contained only

one species of Boeckella, and no centropagid copepods were recorded in Lake Carrilaufquen Chica. A particular case was

the deep Lake Cardiel which presented 4 centropagid copepods

(3 Boeckella species and P. sarsi) though in very low relative

abundances (pooled copepod relative abundances <15%

of total zooplankton abundances). Centropagid copepods constitute

a size gradient (Fig. 3, grey bars). In lakes with fish,

copepods hardly exceeded 1 mm, with the exception of Lake

Cardiel (Fig. 4a). On the other hand, copepod sizes in fishless

lakes ranged from <1mm up to values >5 mm (Fig. 4a). The

difference in maximum copepod sizes between fish and fishless

lakes was significant (MannñWhitney, P = 0.005). The variation

observed in copepod size may imply the coexistence of

different feeding groups within this assemblage.We observed

significant differences in mandible and maxilliped sizes (one

way ANOVA, P < 0.001). The small Boeckella gracilipes and B.

michaelseni exhibited a very small size of the mandibles and

maxillipeds constituting a homogenous group (Fig. 4b, Tukey

test, P > 0.05). These two species feed on particles <50 lm

(Balseiro et al., 2001; Modenutti et al., 2003) and were never

found together, but almost all lakes contained one of them

(Fig. 3). The other centropagid species all displayed significant

differences amongst themselves and with the B. gracilipesñB.

michaelseni group (Fig. 4b, Tukey test, P < 0.001). P. sarsi is carnivorous

preying on rotifers and small copepods and cladocerans

(<1.6 mm) (Heywood, 1970; Balseiro and Vega, 1994;

Die¥guez and Balseiro, 1998). Finally, B. poppei, B. antiqua and

B. brasiliensis, although herbivores, can access large food

items like diatoms and chlorophytes (50ñ150 lm) (Weller,

1977, and own observations). In addition, differences in their

mouthpart sizes (Fig. 4b) may indicate that these species

would exploit a different fraction of this resource, B. poppei

being the species which accesses with larger food items.

Difference in maximum cladoceran body size between fish

and fishless lakes was significant (MannñWhitney, P = 0.017).

In fishless lakes, three large Daphnia species were recorded

(D. dadayana, D. commutata (D. obtusa group sensu Benzie,

2005), and Daphnia sp.) driving the size spectra of cladocera

to sizes that ranged between 2mm and 3.5mm (Fig. 5).

These cladocerans were completely absent in all lakes with

fishes and in two fishless lakes (El Burro and P. Moreno 4).

In these lakes, the presence of smaller cladocerans such as

Ceriodaphnia dubia and Bosmina longirostris were observed,

and cladocera size spectra dropped down to less than 1 mm

(around 0.5 mm) (Fig. 5).

We observed that shallow lakes with introduced fishes

were very similar in the crustacean assemblage with the loss

of large-sized species. Cluster analysis showed three groups:

one (I) corresponded to shallow lakes with introduced fishes

(Carrilaufquen Grande, Carrilaufquen Chica, Nò e Luan and

Blanca), a second one (II) includes two fishless lakes: El Burro and NF1, and finally, the third group (III) included ten fishless

lakes and two lakes with fish: the deep lake Cardiel and the

lake with endemic fish fauna (Del Mie) (Fig. 6).

Smaller zooplankton, like rotifers, showed an opposite

trend to that of crustaceans. In lakes with fish, rotifers dominated

the zooplankton (Table 1) and showed an increase in

species number (2ñ3 species in fishless lakes up to 9 in fish

lakes) and in relative abundance (10% of total abundance in

fishless lakes up to 90% in lakes with fish). In environments

with fish the rotifer assemblage was represented mainly by

filter-feeders Brachionidae such as K. cochlearis, Notholca

acuminata, Brachionus angularis, B. caudatus and B. calyciflorus,

while Lake Carrilaufquen Chica was the only environment

where the predaceous rotifer Asplanchna brightwelli was recorded

(Table 1).

Contrasting phytoplankton abundance and structure was

observed between lakes with and without fish (Fig. 7a and b).

Lakes with fish showed higher abundances of the net phytoplankton

fraction while fishless lakes exhibited a comparatively

greater relative importance of nanoplankton (Table 2).

Lakes with fishes exhibited nano:net ratios less than 0.5 (Table

2) and the difference, when comparing with fishless lakes, was

significant (one way ANOVA, P = 0.001). In addition, we found

some important differences in phytoplankton composition

among lakes. In lakes with introduced fishes phytoplankton

was monopolized by cyanobacteria (Cyanophyceae) both in

terms of abundance (>90% of total cell abundance, Fig. 7a)

and biovolume (>45% of total biovolume, Fig. 7b). Three fish

lakes (Carrilaufquen Grande, Carrilaufquen Chica and Cardiel)

were dominated by filamentous species (Table 1). In Lake Del

Mie, the one with native fish (Galaxias platei), net phytoplankton

also prevailed (Fig. 7a and b), but chlorophyceans (Chlorococcales)

instead of cyanobacteria dominated the assemblage

(Table 1). In fishless lakes cyanobacteria never dominated

(Fig. 7a and b). This result was confirmed by the hierarchical

cluster analysis based on relative abundances of the different

phytoplankton groups. Dendrogram showed two groups: one

(I) corresponds to lakes with introduced fishes (Carrilaufquen

Grande, Carrilaufquen Chica, Nò e Luan, Blanca and Cardiel)

and the other (II) included fishless lakes and the lake with endemic

fish fauna (Del Mie) (Fig. 8). This result indicates that fish

introduction may increase the phytoplankton similarity in

lakes even belonging to different basins on a latitudinal

gradient.


xdiscussion
Size-selective predators have been shown to favor small-bodied

zooplankton through suppression of competitors or intermediate

predators (Brooks and Dodson, 1965; Dodson, 1974;

Hall et al., 1976; Vanni, 1988; Carpenter and Kitchell, 1993).

In Patagonian shallow lakes, the zooplankton community

may change dramatically when fish are present, in that rotifers

dominated both in species number and abundance. The

absence of invertebrate predators (P. sarsi) and large competitors

such as Daphnia may account for the success of this

small filter-feeder group. Although we have not carried out

manipulative experiments the few data on zooplankton

structure previous to fish introduction support our observations.

Marcoli¥n et al. (1968) indicated the presence of large

centropagids such as P. sarsi and Boeckella brasiliensis in Laguna

Blanca before fish introduction. Nowadays, these two species

no longer exist in Laguna Blanca, though they remain in

the nearby ponds Jabo¥n and El Burro.

In fishless lakes co-occurring centropagid species differed

markedly in body and mouthpart sizes; allowing the coexistence

of species that may exploit different food items. Coexistence

of similar species will occur only if they are of

sufficiently different sizes such that there is no overlap in

their diets (Hutchinson, 1951). This assumption is reliable

for the centropagid assemblages of Patagonia, since only species

with different size were observed in the same environment

(Fig. 3). On the contrary, the coexistence of large

Daphnia with this assemblage (Fig. 5) would be consistent with

a weak competition for food resources since large Daphnia

and Boeckella species have a low food niche overlap (Modenutti

et al., 2003).

The loss of distinctive crustacean assemblages and the

increase in similarity within shallow lakes with fish seemed to cascade down to phytoplankton, as significant differences

were also found in phytoplankton composition. Fishless

lakes showed a more heterogeneous phytoplankton community

while cyanobacteria were dominant in lakes with

introduced fishes. In an experimental study comparing

enclosures with and without fishes, Kurmayer and Wanzenbo

® ck (1996) also observed a more heterogeneous algal

community structure in the absence of fishes. Remarkably,

Lake Del Mie, the only lake with native fish, did not show

this pattern of cyanobacteria prevalence though net phytoplankton

dominated (Fig. 7a and b, Table 1). The introduction

of invasive species threatens native biodiversity and ecosystem

functioning (Simon and Townsend, 2003). The prevalence

of cyanobacteria may indicate that nutrient recycling

changed in the presence of fish (Elser, 1999). Probably, the

elimination of Daphnia, a species with high phosphorus

requirements (DeMott et al., 2004), may favor cyanobacteria

proliferation, as Daphnia tends to sink phosphorus and as

such prevents the outbreak of cyanobacteria (Elser, 1999).

In addition, chemical, structural, and nutritional defenses

of cyanobacteria can act as a feedback that favors their dominance

(Christoffersen, 1996; Sukenik et al., 2002; Jang et al.,

2003). Finally, cyanobacteria may have negative effects on

zooplankton and fish assemblages (Laurenmaatta et al.,

1995; DeMott, 1999; Wiegand and Pflugmacher, 2005). Cyanobacteria,

mainly the filamentous ones, interfere with large

zooplankton filtering process, thus a smaller size range of

zooplankton in the lakes with fish could be favored (DeMott

et al., 2001). Despite the different mechanisms involved, we

observed that fish introduction in fishless lakes, is always related with the increase in similarity of crustacean and

phytoplankton composition of lakes (Figs. 6 and 8).

The observed differences in phytoplankton composition

between lakes with introduced fishes and those with native

fish (Lake Del Mie) may be also related with the time of

introduction or colonization. Fish introduction by man

started nearly one century ago, and their effect on food webs

and nutrient recycling seemed to favor cyanobacteria. On

the other hand, fish colonization in Lake Del Mie was postglacial

(Cussac et al., 2004) hence the positive effect on cyanobacteria

may have occurred early in the colonization.

Trophic cascades and nutrient recycling may have favored

non-cyanobacteria net phytoplankton dominance (e.g. chlorophytes)

because nutrient rebalance may have occurred

during succession.

Invasion of predators such as fish may reduce prey diversity

in the short term. However, colonization by species from

nearby fish ponds may compensate for the initial loss of species

and result in a long term positive effect if there is sufficient

dispersal among local habitats (Shurin, 2001). The

Patagonian steppe is an unfavorable region for lake development

(Iriondo, 1989); thus the few existing lakes belong to

different basins. Therefore, it is possible to assume an inadequate

dispersion among local habitats. Shurin (2001) suggested

that small zooplankton coexist regionally with larger

species because of their ability to coexist locally with size-selective predators such as fish. In this sense the presence

of fish would increase regional biodiversity. Some Patagonian

Plateau lakes have native fishes (e.g. Lake Del Mie),

thus small zooplankton coexisted with larger species prior

to fish introductions. Nevertheless, the outcome of other

types of local interactions may also depend on spatial heterogeneity

and movement of species along broad regional

scales (Shurin, 2001). In that sense, the ponds and lakes in

the Patagonian steppe extended difficulties to species dispersion.

In addition, fish introduction in fishless lakes causes

dramatic changes that cascade down to phytoplankton. As

a consequence, water quality decreases and the value of

sport fisheries would be reduced. Thus, fish introduction in

Patagonia is a practice that should be revaluated by governments

and NGOs due to its potentially negative impact on

lakes and local economies. Our study showed clear differences in plankton composition

and zooplankton size spectrum in lakes with and without

fishes. Large and medium-sized centropagids including the

predaceous copepod P. sarsi and the large cladoceran Daphnia

were present in most of the fishless lakes while they were absent

in lakes with fishes. The few available data on copepod

assemblage structure prior to the introduction of fishes confirm

our findings that fish caused a loss in the biodiversity

of centropagid copepods.

We observed that fish introduction homogenizes crustacean

plankton composition causing an increase in the relative

abundance of rotifers. We also found dramatic changes in

phytoplankton community. Cyanobacteria monopolized phytoplankton

in lakes with introduced fishes, but not in fishless

lakes or lakes with endemic fish fauna. Probably the elimination

of Daphnia, a species with high phosphorus requirements,

favored cyanobacteria proliferation due to nutrient

rebalance.