xabstract


We examined the importance of the Eurasian zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) in structuring

macroinvertebrate communities on hard substrata in the Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River system. An experiment using

artificial substrata (i.e., cement bricks with either a layer of living zebra mussels, a layer of intact empty shells that mimicked

living mussels, or with no added layer) showed that macroinvertebrate abundance is enhanced in the presence of zebra

mussels and that macroinvertebrate responses to physical versus biological attributes of mussel beds (e.g., spatial habitat

created by clumped shells; biodeposition) vary among taxa. Moreover, densities of zebra mussels and associated epifauna

have increased severalfold at various sites in the Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River system within the past decade; changes in

community composition were similar to those observed in our artificial substrate experiment. Our results suggest that dense

zebra mussel colonization alters macroinvertebrate communities on hard substrata by enhancing conditions for

deposit-feeding organisms, small gastropods, and small predatory invertebrates, and by displacing large gastropods and

certain large filterers. In the St. Lawrence River, these effects were associated with zebra mussel densities of

1500ñ4000 individuals/m2

, which are likely to be supported by most waterbodies in North America. xintroduction Sessile fouling organisms have been shown to play important

roles in structuring benthic communities (e.g., Paine 1974;

Suchanek 1979, 1986; Ban and Nelson 1987; Matsumasa

1994). On marine rocky shores, mussels form spatially complex

patches (mussel beds) that provide habitat for a diverse

assemblage of organisms (e.g., Tsuchiya and Nishihira 1986;

Jacobi 1987; Ong Che and Morton 1992; Lintas and Seed

1994; Seed 1996) but may also reduce or displace other benthic

fauna (Paine 1974; Griffiths et al. 1992; Hockey and van

Erkom Schurink 1992). Dramatic changes in marine benthic

communities have followed invasions by competitively dominant

mussels (Rao and Rao 1975; Griffiths et al. 1992; Hockey

and van Erkom Schurink 1992; Abdel-Razek et al. 1993).

The introduction of the Eurasian zebra mussel (Dreissena

polymorpha) to the Laurentian Great Lakes in the mid-1980s

(Hebert et al. 1989) added the first epifaunal mussel to North

American freshwater communities, which generally have

evolved without dominant macrofouling organisms. Therefore,

the potential impacts of this invasion on benthic fauna

and food webs have fueled much speculation (e.g., Hebert

et al. 1991; Cooley 1991; Bruner et al. 1994). Although the

zebra mussel has been established in Europe for almost two

centuries (Stanczykowska 1977), and several European studies

provide anecdotal evidence that zebra mussels influence

benthic macroinvertebrate abundance (e.g., Sebestyen 1937;

Dusoge 1966; Wiktor 1969; Izvekova and Lvova-Katchanova

1972; Lyakhnovich et al. 1982; Maslowski 1992; Burlakova

1995), there is little quantitative information available in the European literature that could be used to predict the musselís

impacts on North American benthic fauna. Within the last few

years, the deleterious effects of zebra mussels on native North

American freshwater mussel (Unionidae) populations have become

well documented (e.g., Gillis and Mackie 1994;

Schloesser and Nalepa 1994; Ricciardi et al. 1995a, 1996), but

impacts on epifaunal communities have only recently begun

to be evaluated.

During the past decade, substantial changes in the composition

and abundance of benthic macroinvertebrate fauna occurred

in the lower Great Lakes (Griffiths 1993; Stewart and

Haynes 1994; Wisenden and Bailey 1995), where zebra mussel

population densities were among the highest ever recorded

(~105 mussels/m2, 100-fold higher than in most European

habitats; cf. Stanczykowska 1977). It is unclear whether the

coincident development of dense zebra mussel populations in

the region was the direct cause of these changes, but it has been

suggested that the physical and biological attributes of zebra

mussel beds (e.g., interstitial habitat provided by clumped

mussel shells and byssal threads; filtration currents; food provided

by mussel feces and pseudofeces) play important roles

in structuring benthic communities (Griffiths 1993; Stewart

and Haynes 1994). However, the relative importance of these

attributes for macroinvertebrate assemblages on hard substrata

has not been tested.

In the early 1990s, the zebra mussel expanded its range into

the St. Lawrence River (Mellina and Rasmussen 1994) and

subsequently invaded several other large rivers outside of the

Great Lakes watershed (e.g., the Hudson, Illinois, Mississippi,

Ohio, and Tennessee rivers) (Ludyanskiy et al. 1993). Because

the zebra mussel is expected to become established in most

North American drainages (Strayer 1991; Ramcharan et al.

1992), information on the response of St. Lawrence River benthic

communities to this invasion will help predict the musselís

impacts in riverine ecosystems that have not yet been extensively

colonized. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that

zebra mussel colonization alters the abundance and composition

of macroinvertebrates on hard substrata. Specifically, we

examined the effect of zebra mussels on macroinvertebrate

community development in the St. Lawrence River using deployed

substrata and field surveys and evaluated the relative

importance of physical and biological attributes of mussel

colonies in structuring these communities.


xmethods Artificial substrata (plain cement bricks individually measuring

21.5 ◊ 11 ◊ 6.5 cm) were used to (i) test whether zebra mussel beds

have a significant effect on macroinvertebrate colonization and

(ii) distinguish the relative importance of the physical structure of

zebra mussel beds versus their biological characteristics in influencing

macroinvertebrate abundance and composition on hard substrata.

Clusters of byssally attached zebra mussels (collected from

various sites in the St. Lawrence River and maintained in laboratory

aquaria) were rinsed thoroughly to remove any epizoic animals and

then allowed to attach to one broad (21.5 ◊ 11 cm) surface of each of

10 bricks in aquaria; in some cases, the attachment was reinforced by

the use of a thin nylon thread permanently tying the cluster to the

brick. In this way, 10 bricks were covered with a layer of 128 ± 3.8

(mean ± SE) living zebra mussels (length 22.1 ± 0.6 mm). Ten additional

bricks were similarly covered with a monolayer of 134 ± 3.5

intact, empty mussel shells of the same size range used in the previous

treatment. For this treatment, individual mussels were eviscerated and

the shells were dried at an ambient temperature of 20∞C for several

days; they were subsequently glued (using silicone aquarium sealant

cured in air for 5 days) to one broad (21.5 ◊ 11 cm) surface of each

brick so as to mimic a living zebra mussel bed. In both treatments,

>90% of this surface was covered by the zebra mussel layer,

resulting in a net increase of ~60% of exposed surface area on the top

face of the brick (assuming the bases of attached mussel shells to be

uncolonizable surfaces). Thus, the first set of bricks (treatment 1) was

intended to provide invertebrate colonizers with habitat structure

(mussel shells), food (mussel biodeposits), and other advantages associated

with a living mussel bed, while the second set of bricks

(treatment 2) provided only habitat structure. Finally, 10 additional

bricks were left bare to control for the effects of both treatments.

On May 19, 1995, the bricks were transported in buckets of water

to a shallow (<2 m depth), protected littoral site on Lake St. Louis, an

enlargement of the St. Lawrence River at Lachine, Que. Natural substrate

at this site consisted of a dense layer of cobble on silty sand, and

the local zebra mussel density was 451 ± 53 individuals/m2 of rock

surface. The 30 bricks were haphazardly deployed by a diver within

an area of 10 m2

. They were placed on the cobble, with the zebra

mussel cluster facing upward. After 9 weeks (on July 21, 1995), the

bricks were located, carefully bagged underwater, and transported to

the laboratory. All (20) of the treatment bricks and seven of the control

bricks were recovered. Over 90% of zebra mussels on each of the

bricks used for treatment 1 were still attached and alive at the time of

recovery. Three bricks used for treatment 2 were found damaged

(most of the mussel shells had become detached) and were therefore

omitted from our analysis. Changes in zebra mussel numbers caused

by larval settlement on the bricks during the experiment were negligible

(<2% of original total). All macroinvertebrates were removed

from the bricks using forceps and spray from a water bottle, washed

onto a 500-µm sieve, and sorted. They were identified to at least their

family level (generic level in most cases) following Merritt and Cummins

(1984), Pennak (1989), and Thorp and Covich (1991). These

taxa were subsequently assigned to their respective functional feeding

groups (sensu Cummins 1973) based primarily on information provided

by Merritt and Cummins (1984) and Thorp and Covich (1991),

with the exception that all gastropods were placed within the same

functional group (i.e., scrapers). The amphipod Gammarus fasciatus

feeds on a range of food items but prefers fine particulate organic

material (Delong et al. 1993) and therefore was classified as a deposit

feeder.

The significance of the macroinvertebrate community response to

experimental treatment was determined by multivariate analysis of

variance (MANOVA) of abundance data (numbers of individuals per

brick), which were log10(x + 1) transformed to achieve normality and

stabilize variance (Draper and Smith 1981). For individual taxa, the

effects of different treatments were tested at the 0.05 level using

Tukeyís Studentized range test. Relationships between macroinvertebrate

taxa and treatment were further analyzed by principal components

analysis (PCA). The two factors that explained the most

variance in the data were used as axes to ordinate the taxonomic

groups that responded significantly to treatment. These and all other

statistical analyses were done using SAS procedures (SAS Institute

Inc. 1991).

Macroinvertebrates were sampled at four sites that are part of the

fluvial corridor of the upper St. Lawrence River (Fig. 1). Two sites

were on Lake St. Louis: one was on a jetty at Lachine, Que., and the

other was on the east shore of Ile Madore, an island at the confluence

of the Ottawa and St. Lawrence rivers. The two remaining sites were

located on the eastern end of the Soulanges Canal at Pointe-desCascades,

Que., and on Lake St. FranÁois at Cornwall, Ont. Each of

these four sites supported rich macroinvertebrate communities on abundant cobble and was invaded by zebra mussels in 1990ñ1991

(A. Ricciardi, personal observations). We sampled each site in September

1992, when zebra mussel densities were relatively low, and

resampled them in September 1994 (September 1995 for the Lachine

site) following the develpment of dense zebra mussel populations

in the river (Mellina and Rasmussen 1994; A. Ricciardi and

F. Whoriskey, personal observations). On each sampling occasion,

10 stones were collected randomly from <2-m depths by wading or

snorkeling (except at the Soulanges Canal, where they were collected

from ~6 m depth by a SCUBA diver) within an area of 10 m2 and

placed in individual plastic buckets or enamel trays. The surface area

of each stone was estimated from its three orthogonal dimensions

(length, width, breadth) by an equation that determines the area of an

ellipsoidal shape (Dall 1979):

(1) Surface area = p

3 (length ◊ width + length ◊ breadth

+ width ◊ breadth)

At each site, the mean surface area of stones did not vary by more than

3% between sampling occasions. The mean stone surface areas for

Lachine, Ile Madore, Soulanges Canal, and Cornwall were 554, 381,

535, and 342 cm2

, respectively. All visible macroinvertebrates were

removed from the stones with the aid of forceps, a bristle brush, and

spray from a water bottle and were then washed onto a 500-µm sieve

before being sorted and identified.

To construct a Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River data set that

provided quantitative information on macroinvertebrate abundances

(numbers per square metre of rock surface) before and after zebra

mussel invasion, we combined our field data (Table 1) with literature

data for Lake St. Clair (Griffiths 1993) and Lake Ontario (Stewart and

Haynes 1994) (Table 2). Data from Wisenden and Bailey (1995) were

not included in this synthesis because their experimental design

(which involved the transfer of precolonized rocks between waterbodies)

was not comparable with the other studies. The macroinvertebrate

groups chosen a priori for analysis were three functional

feeding groups (deposit feeders, scrapers, and predators) and four

principal taxa (gammarid amphipods, chironomid larvae, snails, and

turbellarian flatworms); these groups were chosen because they were

well represented at each site in our data set before zebra mussels

became abundant and are considered to be important components of

epibenthic communities that have been altered by zebra mussel invasion

(Dermott et al. 1993; Griffiths 1993; Stewart and Haynes 1994;

Botts et al. 1996).

We tested the significance of observed changes in macroinvertebrate

communities using a multivariate approach. Replicated data for

St. Lawrence River sites were used to construct a robust PCA model

describing macroinvertebrate community structure prior to the establishment

of dense zebra mussel populations. Densities of functional

or taxonomic groups sampled at the time when zebra mussel abundance

was low (i.e., ìbeforeî data) for each St. Lawrence River site

were normalized by log10(x + 1) transformation and ordinated using

PCA (SAS Institute Inc. 1991). The principal component (PC) that

explained the most variance was used to generate scores from before

(baseline) and ìafterî (post-invasion) data for each site (including

Great Lakes sites; because raw replicated before data from the Great

Lakes were unavailable to us, the St. Lawrence River model was applied

to all sites). Each score represented a linear sum of the products

of PCA loadings and macroinvertebrate densities. The differences

between before and after site scores were then tested at the 0.05 level

of significance using paired-comparison t tests. We excluded Ile

Madore from this comparison, because it was the only site in our data

set where zebra mussels did not settle in large numbers during our

sampling period; the zebra mussel population density was only

73 individuals/m2 in 1994, which is an order of magnitude lower than

the lowest densities at which significant community changes associated

with zebra mussel invasions have been reported. Differences

between sites were not tested, as we were primarily interested in how

macroinvertebrate community structure had changed over time in

densely colonized areas of the Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River

system. Bonferroni-corrected t tests were used on log10-transformed data to test changes in the densities of zebra mussels and associated

macroinvertebrates.

xresults


In our artificial substrate experiment, macroinvertebrate numbers

varied significantly among treatments (Wilksí ? =

0.0045, p < 0.0001). The mean total number of invertebrates

(excluding zebra mussels) on bricks declined across the three

treatment levels and was about fourfold higher in the presence

of live mussels than on bare substrate (Fig. 2). Individual taxa

that responded to treatment (F tests, p < 0.05) were ordinated

along two PCs that cumulatively explained 75% (PC1 =

57.6%, PC2 = 17.3%) of the standardized variance (Fig. 3).

The first principal component (PC1) apparently describes an

organismís affinity for mussel beds (treatments 1 and 2) compared

with bare substrate (control), reflecting the general trend

shown in Fig. 2 (i.e., live mussels > dead shells >> control).

Groups that loaded positively on this axis (i.e., deposit feeders and predators) colonized bricks with living zebra mussels in

substantially greater densities than on control bricks (Fig. 4).

Gammarus differed from other deposit feeders (Fig. 5) by responding

only to mussel structure (aggregated shells of living

or dead mussels). Predators (e.g., leeches, flatworms, and

Chaetogaster) and commensal organisms (e.g., Brachycentrus)

were found on live mussels in greater numbers than on

dead shells or bare substrate (Fig. 5). Conversely, the large

filter-feeding caddisfly Cyrnellus loaded negatively on the

PC1 axis (Fig. 3).

The second principal component (PC2) appears to describe

an organismís preference for surfaces with dead shells (treatment

2) compared with living mussel beds or bare substrate.

The weak positive response by Cyrnellus on PC2, coupled

with its strong negative response on PC1, indicates an aversion

to surfaces covered with living mussels and an indifference

towards dead mussel shells (Fig. 5). Most scrapers (i.e., Helicopsyche,

Gyraulus, Birgella) loaded positively on PC2. Helicopsycheís

preference for surfaces with dead shells and

indifference toward living mussels (Fig. 5) is refected by its strong positive score on PC2 and its trivial score on PC1

(Fig. 3). By contrast, deposit-feeding chironomids and ostracods

were enhanced in the presence of living mussels, but did

not respond to dead shells, and therefore scored negatively on

PC2. The treatment response of these organisms was mirrored

by their predators (Fig. 5).

In summary, almost all taxa increased in abundance on substrata

covered with mussels (living or dead), and most

achieved higher densities in the presence of living mussels

compared with dead shells.

Zebra mussel densities on rocks at St. Lawrence River study

sites increased 14-fold, on average, over the 2ñ3 year period

between sampling dates (Fig. 6). At every site, densities of

associated macroinvertebrates increased by 1.6 to 8.4 times

initial values. The smallest increase in macroinvertebrate density

was observed at Ile Madore, which had the smallest zebra

mussel population (73 individuals/m2); at all other sites,

macroinvertebrate density increased at least fivefold. Paired

comparisons of PCA site scores for communities sampled before

and after the establishment of dense zebra mussel populations

at Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River sites indicate that

macroinvertebrate community structure was altered substantially

(t = 8.68, p < 0.0003, using taxonomic group data and a

PC that accounted for 80% of the variance; t = 5.37, p < 0.003,

using functional group data and a PC that accounted for 77%

of the variance). The direction and magnitude of changes in

dominant functional feeding groups (Fig. 7) and taxonomic

groups (Fig. 8) were similar among the three St. Lawrence

River sites, where final dreissenid densities were ~1500ñ3900

mussels/m2, and agreed with the results of our artificial substrate

experiment.

Following the establishment of dense zebra mussel populations,

deposit-feeding organisms (e.g., amphipod and isopod

crustaceans, chironomid larvae) dominated benthic assemblages

at Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River sites. Populations of

G. fasciatus increased dramatically, particularly in Lake

St. Louis at Lachine, where their density multiplied by a factor

of 20 between 1992 and 1995. Turbellarian flatworms and

small gastropods also became highly abundant at most sites

(Tables 1 and 2).

Only a few taxa responded negatively to zebra mussel colonization

at St. Lawrence River sites. In the Soulanges Canal,

larvae of the polycentropodid caddisfly Cyrnellus sp. were

eliminated from rocks that became densely covered with zebra

mussels. Large pleurocerid snails (Elimia livescens) declined

at each of the three mussel-infested St. Lawrence River sites;

they were virtually eliminated at the Lachine and Soulanges

Canal sites, although smaller gastropods (hydrobiids, physids,

limpets, etc.) increased substantially (Table 1). The plumatellid

bryozoan Plumatella fungosa, which historically dominated

cobble at the Lachine site, was reduced to a few small

colonies on zebra mussel shells and on surrounding substrate;

areal coverage by this species declined by 85%. By contrast,

areal coverage by sponges (Eunapius fragilis and Ephydatia

muelleri), which became abundant on mussel shells in

1994ñ1995, did not change significantly (Table 1). xdiscussion
Our findings strongly support the view that dense zebra mussel

populations have a profound impact on the structure of

macroinvertebrate communities on hard substrata, as claimed

in earlier studies (e.g., Dusoge 1966; Griffiths 1993; Dermott

et al. 1993; Stewart and Haynes 1994). Parallel changes in

macroinvertebrate abundance and composition at Great Lakes

and St. Lawrence River sites suggest that habitat differences

had less influence on community structure than the presence of

dense zebra mussel beds. These changes were characterized by

multifold increases in macroinvertebrate densities, and the development

of mussel bed communities dominated by Gammarus,

turbellarian flatworms, and chironomid larvae.

The results of our before and after field comparisons and

artificial substrate experiment were remarkably similar. The

direction and magnitude of the change in abundance of deposit

feeders, predators, and scrapers on rocks at Great Lakes ñ

St. Lawrence River sites mirrors observed differences in community

structure on bricks with and without zebra mussels.

After 9 weeks, the treatment bricks developed musselassociated

communities that were remarkably similar to those

observed at the Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River sites 4 years

after colonization by zebra mussels. The mean density of living

zebra mussels on the treatment bricks (1450 individuals/m2)

was 50% lower than the mean density on stones at our

St. Lawrence River sites in 1994ñ1995 (2854 mussels/m2).

Zebra mussel densities in the St. Lawrence River were

~10-fold lower than those observed at the Great Lakes sites,

yet resulted in similar changes to the macroinvertebrate community,

which suggests that these changes may be better correlated

with zebra mussel biomass or that they may be

provoked by moderate zebra mussel densities. The zebra mussel

density at Ile Madore (73 mussels/m2) was evidently insufficient

to cause significant community changes like those that

occurred at the other St. Lawrence River sites. However, the range of densities at which significant changes were observed

(e.g., 1500ñ4000 mussels/m2) are likely to occur in most lakes

and rivers in North America (Strayer 1991; Ramcharan et al.

1992; Mellina and Rasmussen 1994).

Zebra mussels have a suite of physical and biological attributes

that may influence the structure of their macroinvertebrate assemblages.

Through efficient filtration, zebra mussel populations

can remove large amounts of particulate organic matter

from the water column and deposit these on sediments as agglutinated

mussel feces and pseudofeces (Izvekova and

Lvova-Katchanova 1972; Stanczykowska and Planter 1985).

Mussel biodeposits are a nutrient-rich and easily assimilated

food source (Izvekova and Lvova-Katchanova 1972), and the

organic enrichment of substrata by mussel biodeposition can

alter the local distribution and abundance of benthic invertebrates

(Sephton et al. 1980). Zebra mussel biodeposition is

assumed responsible for increased abundances of depositfeeding

chironomids and oligochaetes in Lake St. Clair (Griffiths

1993) and in European lakes (Lyakhnovich et al. 1982;

Smit et al. 1993). In our field survey, we found 5- to 10-fold

increases in abundances of deposit feeders at the St. Lawrence

River sites where dense (>1500 mussels/m2) zebra mussel

populations became established (Fig. 7). However, our artificial

substrate experiment suggests that this response was provoked

by both physical and biological attributes of zebra

mussels.

Mussel beds increase the surface area and spatial heterogeneity

of benthic substrata, thereby creating habitat for a diverse

group of associated organisms (Suchanek 1979, 1986;

Jacobi 1987; Seed 1996). Spatially complex surfaces tend to

support richer faunal communities (e.g., Abele 1974; Hart

1978; Minshall 1984; OíConnor 1991), presumably because

they provide a greater number of niches and resources.

Clumped mussels have an abundance of interstitial spaces that

may serve as refugia from disturbance and predation for small

organisms (Gosselin and Chia 1995), a role played by other

biological substrata (e.g., Brock 1979; Gillinsky 1984; Ban

and Nelson 1987; Holmlund et al. 1990; Matsumasa 1994).

These spaces also trap sediments and biodeposits (Jacobi

1987; Yager et al. 1993), thus benefiting deposit-feeding organisms.

The interaction between interstitial habitat and sedimentation

makes it difficult to determine the primary

mechanism(s) by which mussel beds enhance populations of

associated fauna. Slepnev et al. (1994) found that invertebrate

colonization was three times higher in the presence of living zebra mussels than in the presence of rubber models; they

attributed this difference to both the accumulation of biodeposits

among living mussels and the more complex spatial structure

of natural mussel aggregations. However, Suchanek

(1979) showed that artificial mussel beds contained faunal

communities virtually identical to those of real Mytilus beds.

The PCA of data from our artificial substrate experiment

(Fig. 3) indicated that although general trends exist, taxa

within the same functional feeding group responded differently

to treatment, suggesting that they responded to more than

just a trophic effect. For several taxa, the effect of mussel

structure on abundance was stronger than the various biotic

effects associated with living mussels (Figs. 4 and 5). Therefore,

although biological attributes of living zebra mussels

played significant roles, we believe that the enhancement of

substrate complexity by zebra mussel beds was generally the

most important factor controlling the changes in macroinvertebrate

composition and abundance at our St. Lawrence River

sites.

Several previous studies have documented an increased

abundance of gammarid amphipods on substrata densely colonized

by zebra mussels (Protasov and Afanasyev 1990; Dermott

et al. 1993; Griffiths 1993; Stewart and Haynes 1994;

Wisenden and Bailey 1995; Botts et al. 1996). Our analysis of

field data confirms a general multifold increase in G. fasciatus

densities coinciding with the development of dense zebra

mussel populations in the Great Lakes ñ St. Lawrence River

system. The results of our artificial substrate experiment suggest

that this increase is a response to enhanced substrate complexity,

which is consistent with published observations that

Gammarus preferentially colonizes interstitial habitat (Gee

1982; Olyslager and Williams 1993).

Zebra mussels may colonize soft substrata by settling on

ìseedî surfaces, i.e., individual shells or stones that serve as

foci for aggregations of byssally attached mussels (Hunter and

Bailey 1992). These aggregations act as islands of firm substrate

for epifauna such as hydroids, sponges, bryozoans, turbellarians,

gastropods, and leeches, in habitats where hard

substrata are scarce (Maslowski 1992; Smit et al. 1995; Botts

et al. 1996). However, the dense colonization of musselcovered

bricks by a rich macroinvertebrate community in the

presence of abundant bare cobble at our experimental site,

coupled with a density enhancement (~400%; Fig. 2) that is

disproportionate with the net increase in surface area created

by mussel beds (~60%), suggests that zebra mussels provide

additional advantages for epibenthic animals.

Filtration currents generated by zebra mussels may be exploited

by small organisms such as young sponge colonies and

filter-feeding caddisfly larvae (e.g., Brachycentrus), which

normally attach themselves to the posterior margins of the

mussel shell in close proximity to the siphons (A. Ricciardi,

personal observation). A similar commensal relationship involving blue mussels (Mytilus edulis) and barnacles

(Balanus improvisus) has been documented; barnacles tend to

attach to the siphonal regions of mussels, and those that attach

to living mussels grow faster than those on empty shells (Laihonen

and Furman 1986). Brachycentrus larvae orient themselves

so that the anterior opening of their case is exposed

to the zebra musselís filtration current; in this position, the

larvae appear capable of scavenging incoming food partices.

Their preference for living zebra mussels as attachment sites

was clearly demonstrated in our artificial substrate experiment

(Fig. 5). Furthermore, Brachycentrus larvae have densely

colonized zebra mussel beds in sections of the St. Lawrence

River where they were historically absent (Conn and Conn

1993; D.B. Conn, University of Sewanee, Sewanee, Tenn.,

personal communication). Sponges are also common epibionts

of zebra mussels in the St. Lawrence River (Ricciardi et al.

1995b), but their aerial coverage of hard substrata does not

appear to be affected by dense zebra mussel colonization

(Table 1).

Another organism commensally associated with zebra mussels

in our artificial substrate experiment and field studies was

the limpet Ferrissia rivularis (Ancylidae). Densities of Ferrissia

in the Soulanges Canal increased fivefold between 1992

and 1994 (Table 1) and were more abundant on zebra mussel

shells than on surrounding substrate. Conn and Conn (1993)

also found F. rivularis occurring in large numbers on zebra

mussel beds. Ferrissia may benefit from grazing on mussel

shell surfaces, which are often covered with attached diatoms

(A. Ricciardi, personal observation), the preferred food item

for limpets (Thorp and Covich 1991). Because limpets appear

to have higher oxygen requirements than most other

gastropods (Pennak 1989), they may also benefit from being

in close proximity to currents generated by mussel siphons. In

our substrate experiment, Ferrissia colonized living mussels

in larger numbers than either dead mussel shells or bare substrate.

By contrast, other scrapers (i.e., Helicopsyche, Birgella,

Gyraulus) did not differentiate between living and dead mussels,

but colonized mussel-covered bricks more densely than

bare bricks (Figs. 3 and 5). The depuration of nutrients (N, P)

from living and dead zebra mussel shells (Stanczykowska and

Planter 1985) could conceivably stimulate periphyton growth

and thus attract scrapers.

Zebra mussels may also enhance local invertebrate abundance

by acting as prey (e.g., for leeches), or as hosts for parasites

and internal commensals. Leeches, particularly

glossiphoniids, are common in zebra mussel aggregations (this

study; Lewandowski 1976; Griffiths 1993; Dermott et al.

1993; Stewart and Haynes 1994) and may prey on zebra mussels (Smit et al. 1993) or their associated invertebrates

(Pennak 1989). The predatory oligochaete Chaetogaster limnaei

is a facultative parasite of zebra mussels (Conn et al.

1996) and may also be abundant in zebra mussel beds (this

study; Piesik 1983; Stewart and Haynes 1994). Larval chironomids

of Paratanytarsus sp. live commensally in the mantle

cavity of zebra mussels, where they are provided with food (in

the form of pseudofeces and mucus secretions) and spatial

refuge (Ricciardi 1994).

Contrary to most previous studies (Griffiths 1993; Dermott

et al. 1993; Stewart and Haynes 1994), our results suggest that

dense coverage of hard surfaces by zebra mussels may reduce

or displace certain species. Large net-spinning caddisfly larvae

(Polycentropodidae) declined after the establishment of zebra

mussel populations at our field sites (Table 1) and avoided

substrata covered by living zebra mussels in our artificial substrate

experiment (Fig. 5). Competition for food and space limits

the distribution and abundance of net-spinning caddisflies

on stones (Lancaster et al. 1990; Hemphill 1988). We believe

that these larvae cannot exploit zebra mussel filtration currents

as can smaller caddisflies (e.g., Brachycentrus). Large netspinning

caddisflies are territorial and space themselves to

avoid receiving water previously filtered by their neighbors

(A. Ricciardi, personal observation; Hemphill 1988). Zebra

mussels may compete with polycentropodid caddisflies for optimal

positions on substrate, and their filtration activity may

produce local flow patterns that interfere with polycentropodid

feeding (cf. Johnson 1990).

The decline of the ectoproct bryozoan Plumatella fungosa

at our Lachine site is unusual given that this species was abundant

at this site in previous years (Ricciardi and Reiswig 1994;

A. Ricciardi, personal observation) and that plumatellids can

use zebra mussels as substrate (e.g., Maslowski 1992). However,

because P. fungosa builds massive spreading colonies on

smooth surfaces in the St. Lawrence River (A. Ricciardi, personal

observation), its growth may be limited by the small

cavities and discontinuous shell surfaces of clumped mussels.

Competition with zebra mussels for local particulates may

have also occurred. Conversely, the decline may have been

caused by a factor unrelated to zebra mussels, such as a change

in water quality (see Ricciardi and Reiswig 1994, and references

therein).

The displacement of large snails (i.e., individuals comparable

in size with zebra mussels) from substrata densely colonized

by zebra mussels has been reported previously (Dusoge

1966; Wisenden and Bailey 1995). Gizinski and Wolnomiejski (1982) noted a reduction in native molluscs coinciding with

the development of shoals of zebra mussels in a Polish reservoir

but did not speculate on mechanisms linking the two

events. Although zebra mussels may negatively impact large

gastropods by fouling their shells (Tucker 1994), mussels

rarely attached to snails at our study sites and probably did not

reduce their abundance through increased mortality. Large

snails may be inefficient at grazing on interstitial surfaces and

thus may have been outcompeted for food and space by smaller

gastropods (cf. Harman 1968). We suggest that the alteration

of hard substrata by zebra mussel aggregations increases the

abundance of snails but limits their mean size, analogous to

the effect that marine mussel beds have on gastropods (Jacobi

1987; Griffiths et al. 1992). However, in littoral areas of lakes

invaded by zebra mussels, gastropods of all sizes could increase

in abundance outside of mussel beds in response to

higher benthic algal growth resulting from the enhanced light

penetration and nutrient deposition associated with zebra mussel

filtration activity (Griffiths 1993; Stewart and Haynes

1994).

We expect that higher abundances of Gammarus, chironomids,

and small gastropods will increase prey availability

for benthivorous fishes such as yellow perch (Perca flavescens),

which feed preferentially on these organisms (Boisclair

and Leggett 1989). Examination of the digestive tracts of yellow

perch and rock bass (Ambloplites rupestris) from the Soulanges

Canal at Pointe-des-Cascades, Que., has shown that

these fish consumed proportionally more Gammarus in the

summer of 1995 than in previous years (A. Ricciardi, unpublished

data). Moreover, a European study found that the production

of benthivorous fish in a lake doubled within 6 years

following zebra mussel invasion; this was attributed to both

direct predation by fish on zebra mussels and indirect predation

on mussel-associated organisms (Karataev and Burlakova

1995). Based on the assumption that mussel biodeposits stimulate

Gammarus production, Bruner et al. (1994) hypothesized

that zebra mussels increase the bioaccumulation of organic

contaminants through aquatic food chains (e.g., seston ñ

mussel feces ñ Gammarus ñ fish ñ bird). However, their assumption

is not supported by the results of our study (Fig. 5)

and Botts et al. (1996), both of which suggest that gammarid

populations are enhanced by habitat structure rather than mussel

biodeposits. It remains to be tested whether gammarids or

other deposit feeders that live in zebra mussel beds have higher

contaminant concentrations than those living outside of mussel

beds.

Our findings indicate that zebra mussel invasions cause rapid

transformations of epilithic communities into assemblages

dominated by zebra mussels, amphipods, chironomids, flatworms,

and small gastropods. Data suggest that larger fauna

adapted to smooth substrate (e.g., pleurocerid snails, certain

net-spinning caddisflies and bryozoans) may be reduced or

eliminated by dense zebra mussel colonization. A number of

physical and biological characteristics of mussel beds (e.g., accumulations

of biodeposits; filtration currents) may contribute

to these changes, but an important factor is the formation of an

interstitial shell matrix that provides refuge, traps sediment,

and enhances substrate complexity. Multifold increases in the

abundance of mussel-associated fauna may occur at zebra

mussel densities as low as 1500 individuals/m2 within a few

years of invasion. Given that most lakes and rivers on this

continent are physically and chemically suitable for the establishment

of these mussel densities (Ramcharan et al. 1992;

Mellina and Rasmussen 1994), we predict widespread

restructuring of North American freshwater benthic communities

and food webs as the zebra mussel continues to invade new

drainages.