xabstract


Kampoosa Bog in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, USA is a 70-ha wetland comprised of calcareous

basin fen and red maple swamp bordered, in part, by roads including the Massachusetts Turnpike. High salt

concentrations in the ground water (due to the application of deicing salts on the Turnpike) and Phragmites

australis colonies appear to be impacting the native vegetation at this site. Sodium and chloride concentrations

at Kampoosa Bog are generally below previously published threshold levels for impacting vegetation,

although such levels vary by species and in relation to other environmental stress conditions. Giant reed

(Phragmites), a salt-tolerant invasive species, invaded the northern portion of the wetland adjacent to the

Turnpike and a gas pipeline sometime after they were built in the 1950s. By 1998, Phragmites had formed

dense colonies that continued to spread across the wetland, which supports several state-listed rare plant and

animal species. High salt concentrations (Na	  112 mg/L, Cl-  54 mg/L) are present up to 300 meters

from the Turnpike. Phragmites colonies occur in areas with high and low salt concentrations, and the species

abundance is not well-correlated with elevated salt levels. Although high salt concentrations and Phragmites

abundance do not seem to produce an interaction effect on the vegetation of the wetland, the graminoid fen

community is impacted by both factors separately. We attribute decreases in the abundance of species

between invaded and non-invaded areas to the presence of Phragmites. In the graminoid fen, we attribute

decreases in both community measures (richness, evenness, and overall cover) and individual species abundances

to high salt concentrations. xintroduction


Kampoosa Bog, located in western Massachusetts,

USA (latitude 42 17íN, longitude 73 18íW), is a

large (70 ha) circumneutral (pH 6.3ñ7.3) wetland complex

(graminoid fen, shrub fen, red maple swamp) that

supports several rare plant and animal species and is

currently thought to be threatened by deicing salts and/

or invasion by giant reed (Phragmites australis [Cav.]

Trin. ex Steudel) (Figure 1). Deicing salts, consisting

primarily of rock salt (sodium chloride) and liquid calcium

chloride, are used on roadways to prevent and

remove the buildup of ice. Deicing salts impact local

water quality, vegetation, and soils by directly increasing

concentrations of sodium, chloride, magnesium,

and calcium (Hutchinson and Olson 1967, Prior and

Berthouex 1967, Schraufnagel 1967, Hutchinson 1970,

Hofstra and Hall 1971, Lumis et al. 1976, Liem et al.

1985, Simini and Leone 1986, Wilcox 1986a, 1986b).

Continued infiltration of road salt into peatlands can

result in long-term changes in peat chemistry and vegetation

composition (Wilcox 1986a, 1986b, Wilcox

and Andrus 1987, Pugh et al. 1996, Panno et al. 1999).

Phragmites australis (hereafter referred to by its generic

name) is a large, perennial, rhizomatous grass

that often grows in near-monotypic stands and effectively

out-competes other vegetation (Lapin and Randall

1993). Although Phragmites is native to brackish

coastal marshes of the northeastern U.S., during the

last several decades, it has become highly invasive

along streambanks and roadside ditches and in a variety

of inland wetlands, including alkaline swamps.

Marks et al. (1994) suggest that the native genotype

may have hybridized with a non-native genotype (per problematic variety that is currently degrading native

wetlands, a hypothesis that is addressed by Chambers

et al. (1999). Besides deicing salts, other factors, such

as pollution, alteration of the natural hydrologic regime,

dredging, and increased sedimentation, may favor

the invasion and continued spread of Phragmites

(Roman et al. 1984).

Kampoosa Bog, like many wetlands, has been impacted

by human activities, including hydrologic alteration,

logging, application of deicing salt to adjacent

roadways, and non-native species introductions. Gaining

knowledge of the specific impacts that these activities

have on species composition, ecological processes,

and the integrity of natural communities is an important

step in the process of protecting natural systems

from further degradation and of designing

restoration activities. Our research assessed the relationship

between salt concentrations, Phragmites

abundance, and vegetation composition of Kampoosa

Bog. Specifically, we evaluated three hypotheses: 1)

Phragmites abundance is positively correlated with deicing

salt concentrations, 2) fen vegetation differs in

composition (richness, evenness, cover, and individual

species abundances) between areas with high and low

concentrations of sodium and chloride, and 3) fen vegetation

differs in composition between areas with and

without Phragmites.

SITE DESCRIPTION

Incorrectly named a bog, Kampoosa Bog is actually

a circumneutral wetland complex that consists of a

central open pond (1.3 ha) surrounded by a graminoid

fen (9.2 ha), a shrub fen (4.4 ha), and a red maple

swamp (55.8 ha). At least nineteen state-listed plant and animal species occur in the wetland complex, including

5 endangered and 7 threatened species, as well

as a unique lake-basin fen community (Weatherbee

1994). The graminoid fen includes over 60 species and

is characterized by sedges (Carex aquatilis, C. lasiocarpa

Ehrh., Cladium mariscoides [Muhl.] Torr.) and

low shrubs (Betula pumila L., Myrica gale, Potentilla

fruticosa L., Vaccinium macrocarpon) growing on a

thick peat mat. Water enters the complex via groundwater

discharge and surface water from the surrounding

approximately 546-ha watershed.

The Massachusetts Turnpike crosses the northern

portion of Kampoosa Bog (Figure 1), and when it was

built in the mid-1950s, it most likely altered the hydrology

of the system by changing the hydrologic connection

with the northernmost portion of the wetland

(Caljouw 1984). Construction of a gas pipeline in 1951

near the Turnpike corridor (and additional pipeline

construction along the right-of-way in 1971 and 1992)

also impacted the wetland complex by disturbing the

soils in the northern portion. Several large stands of

Phragmites occur in the wetland. Although the date of

its first occurrence in the area is not known, Phragmites

was not apparent on aerial photographs taken in

1952, 1972, 1985, and 1991. The graminoid fen did

not appear to have any structural differences between

areas that would and would not be later invaded by

Phragmites (Richburg 1999). Although not apparent

on the photography, Phragmites was well-established

along the Massachusetts Turnpike by 1983 (Rawinski

1983), and by 1992, it had invaded the northern section

of the graminoid fen, a section of red maple

swamp along the Turnpike, and the adjacent gas pipeline.

Phragmites invasion at this site has variously

been attributed to road-salt application, disturbance

(from beaver, human, and other activities), hydrologic

changes, and/or the invasive nature of Phragmites

(Caljouw 1984, Weatherbee 1994). xmethods

Water Chemistry

Water chemistry was sampled to characterize the

distribution of salt in the wetland. Fifty-seven wells

were installed in 1996 and 1997 by subjectively locating

nineteen 15x15m plots across the northeastern

portion of the wetland. Plots were selected based on

community type (fen or red maple swamp) and presence

or absence of Phragmites. Within each plot, we

randomly selected three of fifteen 3x5m subplots to

receive wells. Plots were located in this northeastern

portion of the wetland to capture differences in vegetation

within the area with the greatest abundance of

Phragmites and to sample the portion of the wetland

assumed to be receiving the greatest influx of road salt

from the Massachusetts Turnpike. In 1998, additional

wells were installed to sample the entire wetland more

completely by using eight east-west transects established

200m apart in the western and southern portions

of the wetland. Thirty-seven wells were installed at

100-m intervals along the transects. Wells were made

from 3.8-cm internal diameter Schedule 40 PVC pipe

with the bottom 30 cm perforated and inserted to a

depth of 60 cm.

Water was collected from each of the 94 wells during

a three-week period in June/July 1998. Sodium ion

(Na	) concentrations (mg/L) and pH were measured

and recorded in the field using a Hanna HI931101 sodium

meter and a Hanna HI9023C pH meter, respectively

(USGS 1983). Water samples were stored at

room temperature (12ñ20C) until analyzed in the lab

using a DR/2010 Hach spectrophotometer (method

#8113, Hach Company 1997) for chloride ion (Cl-)

concentration (mg/L). Water was collected only once

for this study because a review of Na	 and Cl- concentration

data from water samples collected from

summer 1997 to summer 1998 indicated that early

summer concentrations are generally the highest for

the year and that the patterns of high-to-low concentrations

across the wetland do not change during the

year (Richburg 1999).

Vegetation Sampling

Vegetation in the graminoid fen was sampled for

vascular species cover over a two-year period on fortytwo

15-m2 subplots. One subplot was located at each

of the 30 wells within the 10 plots across the graminoid

fen, and an additional 12 subplots were established

by locating two subplots at each well along

three transects, one subplot directly north and one

south of each well (Figure 1). In addition, eighty-nine

15-m2 subplots to measure Phragmites abundance

were located surrounding the wells within the red maple

swamp portion of the wetland. These subplots were

located within nine plots (each with three subplots)

plus two subplots at each of 31 sampling points along

eight transects.

Each 3m x 5m subplot was sampled for vascular

species cover using the releve¥ method (Mueller-Dombois

and Ellenberg 1974). Percent cover of each species

was estimated in 5% increments above 10%. Species

with cover 10% were recorded as rare (only one

or two individuals), 1% (more than two individuals,

but 1% cover), 1ñ5%, 5ñ6%, or 7ñ9% cover. Individual

woody species (trees and shrubs) were recorded

as present in each of three height classes (seedling

[0.5m], sapling [0.5m to 3m], and tree [3m])

within which they occurred and assigned a separate cover class for each height class. Thus, for example,

a 4-m-tall red maple would receive a cover estimate

for only the tree height class. Richness values were

calculated as the number of species in each subplot

and evenness values as the evenness of non-zero species

values (E  H/ln[S] where H  Shannon index

and S  richness [McCune and Mefford 1999]). Taxonomy

follows Gleason and Cronquist (1991).

Data Analyses

To determine the extent to which Phragmites abundance

was correlated with sodium and chloride concentrations,

we used linear regression analyses for all

subplots and wells and also for the graminoid fen and

red maple swamp subplots separately. Within the graminoid

fen, subplot data were averaged by plot (3 subplots)

or transect point (2 subplots) for statistical analyses.

Plots were assigned to a high or low sodium

group and a high or low chloride group based on their

Na	 and Cl- concentrations (concentrations of both

ions normally distributed). Concentrations greater than

the mean for the fen plots (average Na	  112 mg/L,

Cl-  54 mg/L) were ranked as high, and those at or

below the mean were ranked as low (Table 1). Although

chloride is directly more detrimental to plants

than sodium (sodium is more likely to affect soil structure)

and is a more conservative tracer of salt (sodium

enters into ion exchange reactions), we included sodium

concentrations in our analysis as an indicator of

salt in the system because they were measured using

a method that gave more consistently reliable results

than did our chloride analyses. Although our chloride

concentrations were lower than those determined by a

professional lab, our sodium and chloride plots were

correlated (R2  0.58), and all plots assigned to the

high sodium group were also assigned to the high

chloride group. In addition, one plot in the low sodium

group was included in the high chloride group. Average

cover, species richness, and evenness among

plots with and without Phragmites and among plots

with high and low Na	 and Cl- were tested for significant

differences using Studentís t-test. Due to the

large number of zeros in the vegetation cover data set,

the Mann-Whitney U-test was used to compare groups

(high/low sodium, high/low chloride, with/without

Phragmites) for individual species abundance. An

analysis of variance was used to determine if there

were significant interactions among high/low sodium

and chloride and with/without Phragmites.

xresults


Relationship of Phragmites Abundance to Salt

Concentrations

For the wetland as a whole, sodium and chloride

ion concentrations were highest along the northern

edge of the wetland (Na	 200ñ390 mg/L, Cl- 210ñ275

mg/L) (the area closest to the Turnpike) and gradually

decreased to approximately 80 and 60 mg/L sodium

and chloride, respectively, at the southern end of the

fen (650m from the Turnpike) and then to 15 mg/L or

less for both ions at the southernmost wells (Figures

2 and 3).

Several large Phragmites colonies are located in the

graminoid fen and red maple swamp communities at

Kampoosa Bog. Regression of Phragmites abundance

against sodium concentration for all subplots (regardless

of community type) and for graminoid fen and red

maple swamp subplots separately indicated very weak

correlations (R2 for all subplots  0.195, for graminoid fen  0.355, for red maple swamp  0.204). A comparison

of chloride concentrations with Phragmites resulted

in even weaker correlations (R2 of 0.005, 0.038,

and 0.009 for the three groups, respectively).

Salt Impacts on Fen Vegetation

Sodium ion concentrations for the graminoid fen

ranged from 19 to 267 mg/L, with a mean of 112 (std

error 17). Chloride ion concentrations ranged from 5

to 114 mg/L, with a mean of 54 (std error 8). Species

richness, evenness, and total plant cover were significantly

lower in plots with high sodium and high chloride

(Table 1). Individual species abundances also varied

significantly in plots with high vs. low sodium and

high vs. low chloride. Of the 68 species recorded for

the fen community, eight (12%) had significantly lower

cover in the high sodium plots and 11 (16 %) in

the high chloride plots, while only one (1%) had greater

cover with high sodium and chloride (Tables 2 and

3).

Phragmites Impacts

Phragmites was present in 15 of the 42 subplots in

the graminoid fen, with cover values ranging from 3%

to 90%. Richness, evenness, and total cover were not

significantly different between plots with and without

Phragmites (Table 4), but individual species had significant

differences in their cover depending on Phragmites

presence. Of the 68 species recorded for the fen

community, three (4%) had significantly lower cover

with Phragmites, and three (4%) had greater cover

(Table 5). Two of the 3 species with lower cover, Carex

aquatilis and Myrica gale, were among the most

common fen species in subplots without Phragmites.

The interaction of salt and Phragmites on richness,

evenness, and total cover was evaluated using an analysis

of variance. Significant interactions were not

found. xdiscussion
Evidence of road salt entering the wetland along the

border with the Massachusetts Turnpike is clear, with

chloride concentrations ranging from 275 mg/L near

the Turnpike to low background concentrations of 15

mg/L in wells far from the Turnpike (typical chloride

concentrations for upland surface waters range from 0

to 12 mg/L [Hanes et al. 1970 in Transportation Research

Board 1991]). Mattson et al. (1992) sampled 25

lakes in the calcareous bedrock region of Massachusetts

and reported the median concentrations of sodium

and chloride were 5 and 10 mg/L, respectively. Concentrations

of sodium and chloride at Kampoosa Bog,

which lies within this calcareous bedrock region, are the southernmost portion of the wetland farthest from

the Turnpike. Earth Tech Inc. (1997) reported that

road-salt impacts to upland vegetation along roadways

are limited to an approximately 10-meter-wide band

adjacent to the road, although Hofstra and Hall (1971)

found evidence of salt impacts up to 120 m from a

roadway. Schauffler et al. (1996) found that aerosol

deposition from road salt did not occur further than

200 m from a roadway in Maine. At Kampoosa Bog,

elevated sodium and chloride concentrations more than

600 m from the highway indicate that salt may be

impacting much of the wetland, probably through surface-

and ground-water transport from near the Turnpike.

Forman and Alexander (1998) reported that, even in

wetlands, changes in water quality (e.g., increased salinity)

from road run-off tend to be temporary and localized

due to increased flow that accompanies increased

ion content. Richburg (1999), however, found

that sodium and chloride concentrations at Kampoosa

Bog remained elevated throughout the year, indicating

either a chronic influx of road salt to this system or

long retention times. Although concentrations remained

above presumed background levels throughout

the year, Richburg (1999) found annual fluctuations in

chloride concentrations at Kampoosa Bog with the

highest concentrations occurring in the early spring

(after winter applications of road salt) and the lowest

in the fall (after several months without application of

road salt). These variations reflect the tendency of

chloride ions to migrate out of the root-zone as reported

by Wilcox (1986a) and Wilcox and Andrus

(1987) for Pinhook Bog (Indiana) once salt inputs

stopped. Kampoosa Bog clearly has a plume of salt

present in the wetland, but we do not know if it is

advancing, retreating (including downward migration

out of the root-zone), or remaining the same under

existing salt-application rates (approximately 11 metric

tons/lane kilometer/season [Balliett 1996]).

Studies of the impacts of road salt on vegetation

have focused on roadside trees and grasses (Roberts

and Zybura 1967, Hofstra and Hall 1971, Hall et al.

1972) and the possible effects of road salt in wetlands

(Wilcox 1986b, Isabelle et al. 1987, Pugh et al. 1996,

Schauffler et al. 1996, and Panno et al. 1999). Sodium

and chloride concentrations 300 mg/L generally impact

vegetation adversely. Wilcox (1986b) reported

that all endemic bog plants were absent from areas

with chloride 1215 mg/L and sodium 468 mg/L,

but he also found that the salt tolerance of species

varied greatly. Several species at his site (Pinhook

Bog, Indiana), including Larix laricina (Duroi) K.

Koch., Nemopanthus mucronatus (L.) Trel., and Carex

trisperma Dewey., were intolerant of sodium and chloride

levels as low as 112 and 168 mg/L, respectively

(Wilcox 1986b). Panno et al. (1999) reported an increase

in Typha angustifolia L. and a decrease in Scirpus

acutus coincident with plumes of sodium (10ñ90 mg/L) and chloride (45ñ200 mg/L). Wilcox

(1986b) also reported an increase in Typha angustifolia

in the salt impacted area at Pinhook Bog. Sphagnum

mosses are more sensitive to high ion levels than

many vascular plants (Wilcox 1984, Wilcox and Andrus

1987). At Kampoosa Bog, salt concentrations

similar to those reported by Panno et al. (1999) may

be impacting the vegetation, particularly within the fen

community, with significant decreases in richness,

evenness, and abundance of species in plots with high

sodium and chloride concentrations. In addition to the

negative impacts on community properties, dominant

fen species, such as Salix candida and Vaccinium macrocarpon,

had significantly lower abundances in high

salt (Na	  112 mg/L, Cl-  54 mg/L) plots at Kampoosa.

Phragmites readily establishes in disturbed soils

when seeds or rhizomes are introduced (Marks et al.

1994). Because Phragmites did not become a problem

in the interior of the Kampoosa Bog wetland until after

ca. 1990, disturbance plus a seed source at the northern

end of the wetland likely led to expansion into the

wetland. Seeds and/or rhizomes of invasive genotypes

of Phragmites growing elsewhere may have been

brought in on construction equipment during work in

the Turnpike or gas pipeline right-of-way, facilitating

Phragmites establishment on the disturbed soil. Ditches

along highway rights-of-way have also been shown

to serve as migration corridors for invasive wetland

plants (Wilcox 1989). Although Phragmites is a salttolerant

species, its current abundance in the wetland

as a whole or in the graminoid fen specifically is not

well-correlated with salt concentrations.

Phragmites colonies appear to be impacting the

composition and structure of the Kampoosa Bog fen.

Although species richness is similar in plots with and

without Phragmites (p0.05), this species dominates

at the expense of other species in most plots where it

occurs. The fen plots with Phragmites had lower cover

of Carex aquatilis and Myrica gale, two species that

dominate fen plots without Phragmites. Thus, although

species richness may be similar, the composition and

structure of communities with Phragmites differ from

those without Phragmites. Within Phragmites-dominated

plots, native species are probably stressed by

competition for nutrients and/or light. Meyerson et al.

(2000) reported that individuals of species competing

with Phragmites are often weak and may not represent

viable populations, therefore ultimately resulting in a

decrease in richness.

CONCLUSIONS

Kampoosa Bog is one of the best examples of a

calcareous lake-basin fen in Massachusetts, but it has

been and continues to be adversely impacted by both

the application of road salt near the wetland and by

Phragmites invasion. Although salt concentrations and

Phragmites abundance are not well-correlated, and interaction

effects of these two factors do not significantly

affect community properties of the graminoid

fen; high salt concentrations and Phragmites are individually

associated with negative impacts.

Road salt from the Massachusetts Turnpike seems

to be elevating salt concentrations in the Kampoosa

Bog wetland. Both the red maple swamp and the graminoid

fen have sodium and chloride concentrations

well above background levels, but the vegetation of

the graminoid fen seems to be especially impacted by

high salt concentrations. Decreases in richness, evenness,

and total plant cover and decreases in cover of

8 (Na	) or 11 (Cl) individual species indicate that salt

is impacting the graminoid fen at both the community

and the individual species levels. We do not know how

long this system has been influenced by high salt concentrations

nor if these ions are continuing to increase

or decrease throughout the wetland (road-salt application

rates have been reduced to half those used in

the 1970s). Future studies of salt concentrations may

determine if salt is increasing or decreasing in the wetland

and how the vegetation of the entire wetland is

responding to these changes.

This research also supports subjective observations

that Phragmites negatively impacts the graminoid fen as indicated by lower cover values for many of the

common fen species. Although richness, evenness, and

total cover are not significantly different between graminoid

fen plots with and without Phragmites, changes

in the individual species cover indicate that there

are changes coincident with Phragmites invasion.

More importantly, the species most impacted by

Phragmites in the graminoid fen are those (such as

Carex aquatilis and Myrica gale) that characterize the

fen community. If these species are out-competed and

Phragmites dominates, the graminoid fen as a community

will be changed, perhaps even resulting in the

degradation of the peat mat due to increased oxidation

(Bart and Hartman 2000). This change will probably

have negative impacts on the rare plants and animals

that inhabit the graminoid fen community. Although

Kampoosa Bog has been and continues to be impacted

by Phragmites and high salt concentrations, management

activities to control these factors might reverse

the trends identified here. Recently, a Phragmites control

project (including herbicide application and flower

head removal) has been initiated at Kampoosa Bog in

an effort to prevent further degradation of the vegetation.

Reducing or eliminating the influx of road salt

into the wetland through the creation of a reduced

road-salt zone or the diversion of runoff away from

the wetland may allow salt-impacted native vegetation

to recover at Kampoosa Bog.