xabstract
The effect of patchy colonies of the invasive
zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) on sedimentary
processes was investigated in a mesotrophic lake (Plateliai
Lake, Lithuania). Benthic fluxes of O2, TCO2, CH4, Mn2?,
Fe2?, N2, the inorganic forms of N, Si and P and dissolved
organic C and N were quantified by dark incubations of
sediments cores, with and without D. polymorpha. Individual
mussels also were incubated for metabolic
measurements. Sediments with D. polymorpha had significantly
higher O2 and TCO2 fluxes and displayed higher
rates of denitrification. The presence of mussels also
resulted in higher regeneration of P and N (mostly as
ammonium) while the effect on Si was not significant.
However, likely due to the low zebra mussel biomass
(57.2 ± 25.3 gSFDW m-2), biodeposition has not changed
the ratio between anaerobic and total respiration. Methane
and reduced metals fluxes were in fact similar in the presence
and absence of D. polymorpha. Incubations of
mussels without sediments confirmed that bivalve metabolism
was the main driver of benthic respiration and
nutrient recycling. Nitrate production suggested the presence
of nitrifiers associated with the molluscs. The main
outcome of this study was that zebra mussels alter the
quantity and the stoichiometry of nutrients regenerated by
the benthic compartment. The enhancement of nitrogen
loss via denitrification, by a factor of 1.5, was much less
pronounced than the increase in ammonium recycling rate,
stimulated by a factor of 33. Negligible PO4
3- fluxes in
bare sediments (-3.4 ± 6.8 lmol m-2 h-1) increased in
the presence of mussels and considerable amounts of this
nutrient (69.6 ± 29.4 lmol m-2 h-1) were mobilized to
the water column. Further research should address other
nutrient sources to the lake to verify whether altered rates
and stoichiometry of benthic regeneration can affect primary
producer community composition and activity.

xintroduction
The invasion of the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha)
in European and North American waters has induced
alterations of element cycling, and benthic and pelagic
primary production, thus affecting whole lake and river
functioning (Caraco et al. 1997, 2006; Conroy and Culver
2005; Strayer et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2011; Ozersky et al.
2012). Zebra mussel reefs filter large amounts of water,
deplete dissolved oxygen through respiration, exert strong
control on phytoplankton biomass and recycle a large
amount of nutrients (Effler and Siegfried 1994; Hecky et al.
2004; Qualls et al. 2007; De Stasio et al. 2008; Zaiko et al.
2010). By increasing water transparency and excreting
inorganic forms of N and P, they elevate the growth
potential of benthic and pelagic primary producers (Zhang
et al. 2011).
There is an open debate on the potential use of filterfeeding
bivalves in fresh, brackish and marine waters to
counteract eutrophication (Bartoli et al. 2001, 2003;
Newell 2004; Nizzoli et al. 2007; Qualls et al. 2007;
Stadmark and Conley 2011; Zhang et al. 2011; Petersen
et al. 2012). Filter feeders can be instrumental in counteracting
phytoplankton blooms (e.g. Schernewski et al. 2012;
McLaughlan and Aldridge 2013) through efficient filtration
of large water volumes, thereby increasing water transparency
and reducing total nutrients (Caraco et al. 2006).
Higher light penetration can favor the re-colonization of
rooted macrophytes, with a further control on available
nutrients, and reverse one of the most detrimental effects of
eutrophication; which is the disappearance of submerged
aquatic vegetation (Scheffer et al. 2003; Zhu et al. 2006;
Viaroli et al. 2008). Furthermore, bivalve biodeposits fertilize
sediments with labile organic carbon, stimulating
benthic respiration and denitrification, resulting in a permanent
loss of nitrogen (Bruesewitz et al. 2006, 2008).
Alternatively, introduced filter feeders could have adverse
impacts (Bartoli et al. 2001; Nizzoli et al. 2006; Qualls
et al. 2007; Zhang et al. 2011; Stadmark and Conley 2012).
High densities of filter feeders have the potential to
increase benthic respiration, augmenting the risk of water
column and sediment hypoxia (Effler and Siegfried 1994;
Caraco et al. 2000; Bartoli et al. 2001). Labile biodeposits
may stimulate anaerobic metabolism and decouple redox
processes at the water–sediment interface, resulting in CH4,
Fe2? or Mn2? release to the water column (Davison et al.
1982; Lovley and Phillips 1988; King 1990). The sudden
release of soluble reactive phosphorous is generally associated
with iron reduction in anoxic sediments, altering the
ratio between regenerated N and P (Bostro¨m et al. 1988).
Simultaneously, the activity of filter feeders promotes the
release of ammonium (NH4
?) via direct excretion or via
the suppression of nitrification and the enhancement of
dissimilatory reduction of nitrate to NH4
? (Mazouni et al.
1996; James et al. 1997; Bartoli et al. 2003; Nizzoli et al.
2006; Zhang et al. 2011).
Studies focusing on the effects of filter feeders on benthic
metabolism have mainly addressed areas where reefs
of naturally occurring, cultivated or invasive species are
present in large densities (Effler and Siegfried 1994;
Nizzoli et al. 2006; Forrest et al. 2009). They have mainly
considered the alteration of nitrogen (and phosphorus)
benthic cycling while other, potentially important nutrients
such as silica have received less attention (Stan´czykowska
and Lewandowski 1993; Arnott and Vanni 1996; Gardner
et al. 2001; Bruesewitz et al. 2009). It is well accepted that
alteration of the ecological stoichiometry of N, Si and P
(Sterner and Elser 2002) is more important than a single
nutrient enrichment for selecting, stimulating or inhibiting
primary producer communities (Arnott and Vanni 1996;
Bykova et al. 2006). This is particularly relevant in oligoor
mesotrophic ecosystems, where primary producers
mainly rely on surface sediments and associated benthic
communities for the supply of nutrients (Carignan and
Kalff 1980; Vanni 2002).
In this study, our aim was to analyze the effect of patches
of the invasive zebra mussel on benthic processes,
including respiration rates and sediment–water fluxes of N,
Si and P in a mesotrophic lake (Plateliai Lake, Lithuania).
Our hypothesis was that D. polymorpha can alter the
stoichiometry of available inorganic nutrients and in particular
the N:P ratio. There is some evidence of enhanced
denitrification rates in the presence of zebra mussels and of
greater P availability due to mussel excretion and release
from organic enriched, hypoxic sediments (Conroy and
Culver 2005; Bruesewitz et al. 2009; Svenningsen et al.
2012). Low ratios of regenerated N and P, together with
selective filtration of phytoplankton, may stimulate blooms
of nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria, affecting water transparency
and benthic primary producers (Vanderploeg et al.
2001). Our objectives were to (a) investigate if and how
colonies of D. polymorpha altered sediment metabolism,
and (b) analyze whether zebra mussels altered the stoichiometry
of recycled N, P and Si. These objectives were
achieved by measuring dissolved oxygen, inorganic carbon,
N2, CH4, Fe2? and Mn2? fluxes as well as N, Si and P
regeneration from bare and colonized sediments.

xmethods
Study area
Plateliai Lake (area 1,200 ha, average depth 10.5 m) is a
mesotrophic lake (2.4 ± 1.8 lg Chl a l-1 in the period
2001–2010) located in the western part of Lithuania (56
02001.5000, 215101.2100) (Fig. 1). Green algae dominate the
phytoplankton community in the summer period. Water
transparency, measured via Secchi disk, varied between a
minimum of 4.3 m (2010) and a maximum of 7.4 m
(2005). The dominant bottom substrates are sand, silt and
mud; macroalgal beds of Chara sp. are widespread in the
littoral zone, forming large patches from 2 to 9 m depth.
The invasion of D. polymorpha in Lithuanian waters
probably dates back to the 18th century, but there is no
specific information for Plateliai Lake. At present, mussels
are widespread in the littoral zone but colonies are extremely
patchy, probably due to an early colonization stage,
the scarcity of hard substrata or the relatively low trophic
status of the lake.
Sediment and mollusk collection
In July 2012, intact sediment cores and individuals of D.
polymorpha were collected from Plateliai Lake littoral
zone at 5 m depth (Fig. 1). Cores were collected along a
transect parallel to the shoreline and had similar soft,
organic sediments identified in areas devoid of Chara sp.
beds. Zebra mussels were present in colonies with a
diameter of a few cm (57.2 ± 25.3 gSFDW m-2), attached
to stones, coarse woody debris or any hard substratum as
shells. These small colonies had variable numbers of
individuals and represented the dominant typology of
mussel aggregation in the investigated area. A total of 18
cores were collected by scuba diving; half contained bare
sediments without mussels (S cores) and half contained
sediments with an overlying colony of D. polymorpha
(S ? D cores). Cores had an 8 cm internal diameter and a
length of 40 cm, which allowed collection of undisturbed
sediments (with or without mussels) and a clear water
phase. Colonies of D. polymorpha were also collected for
use in metabolic measurements. Cores and mussels were
transported within 2 h from the sampling site to the laboratory,
submersed in in situ water cooled with ice packs.
Four 25 l plastic tanks were used to collect approximately
100 l of in situ water that was transferred to the laboratory
for preincubation and incubation procedures.
Benthic flux measurements
In the laboratory, the sediment depth in all cores was adjusted
to contain approximately 15 cm of sediment and 25 cm of
water. Cores were maintained in the dark, in a temperaturecontrolled
room at temperature similar to in situ bottom
conditions (16 C). They were submerged with the top open
in a large incubation tank containing aerated lake water,
constantly mixed by aquarium pumps. A stirrer bar, driven by
an external magnet at 40 rpm, was inserted to the water phase
of each core approximately 15 cm above the sediment interface
to ensure water exchange with the tank and avoid water
stagnation in the core during incubations. The lowspeed of the
bar and its height above the interface prevented the resuspension
of sediment particles. The cores were preincubated
overnight. The following morning the water in the tank was
replacedwith freshwater collected in situ; the vigorousmixing
of the water in the tank and its stirring within the cores ensured
homogeneous chemical conditions in a few minutes. Thereafter,
dark incubations started. At the beginning of
measurements, water samples (ca. 100 ml) were collected
from the tank (n = 5) with plastic syringes and all cores were
closed with rubber stoppers. An incubation period of 3 h was
set in order to keep the final O2 concentration to within
20–30 % of the initial value. At the end of the incubation, the
water level of the tank was lowered just below the cores top
opening, the rubber stoppers were removed and an additional
water sample (ca. 100 ml) was collected from each core.
Immediately after water sampling, three aliquots of 20 ml each
were transferred to 12.0 ml Exetainers (Labco Scientific, UK)
forO2, TCO2 andCH4 analysis; excesswaterwas used to flush
the exetainers. Winkler reagents were immediately added to
the O2 samples while the TCO2 and CH4 samples were preserved
with 50 ll of 4 % HgCl2. Titrations for O2 and TCO2
were performed within 2 days; CH4 gas chromatographic
analyses were done within 1 week. A 30 ml aliquot was filtered
(GF/F glass-fiber filters) and stored in 10 ml plastic vials
for dissolved inorganic nitrogen and silica (NH4
?, NO3-,
NO2
- and SiO2) and in 5 ml glass vials for soluble reactive
phosphorus (PO4
3-), dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and
nitrogen (DON) determination, respectively. All these analyses
were done immediately after sampling. A 10 ml aliquot
was filtered, transferred into glass vials and acidified with
50 ll of concentrated HNO3
- for dissolved Mn2? and Fe2?
analysis, which was carried out within 2 weeks.
Net fluxes (lmol or mmol m-2 h-1) of all measured
solutes across the sediment–water interface were calculated
according to the following equation:
Flux ¼ Cf  Ci x V=ðt x AÞ
where Cf and Ci are the final and initial concentrations of
the target solute (lM or mM), V is the volume of the water
phase in the core (L), t is the incubation time (h) and A is
the surface of the core (m2).
Denitrification measurements
After the incubation for solute flux measurement, the cores
were left submerged with the top open for a few hours in
the incubation tank and thereafter a second incubation was
started to determine N2 production via denitrification
according to the isotope pairing technique (Nielsen 1992).
Briefly, at the beginning of the denitrification experiment,
the water level in the tank was lowered just below the core
top opening and each core was amended with labeled
potassium nitrate (K15NO3 98 % atom, Cambridge Isotope
Laboratories, MA, USA) to a final concentration of 30 lM
15NO3
-. A water sample was collected from each core
before and 5 min after the addition of labeled nitrate to
calculate the ratio between labeled and unlabeled pools.
The sediment cores were then sealed again with rubber
stoppers, fully submersed by adding water to the incubation
tank and incubated for 3 h with stirring. At the end of the
incubation, the water in the tank was lowered again, the
stoppers removed and all the cores were poisoned with
5 ml of 7 M ZnCl2 and gently mixed to slurry. The whole
sediment horizon was resuspended as bioturbation can
transport labeled nitrate and stimulate denitrification in
deep layers. Subsamples of the slurries were collected with
plastic syringes, transferred into 12.0 ml Exetainers and
another 100 ll 7 M ZnCl2 were added to stop microbial
activity. Abundance of 29N2 and 30N2 in the slurry were
measured via mass spectrometry. Rates of denitrification of
water column nitrate (Dw) and of nitrate produced within
sediments via nitrification (Dn) were calculated according
to the equations and assumptions reported in Nielsen
(1992); total denitrification is defined as the sum of Dw
and Dn.
D15 ¼ p 29 N2 + 2p 30 N2 andD14 ¼ p 29 N2 + 2p 28 N2
where D15 and D14 are rates of denitrification based on
15NO3
– and 14NO3
–, respectively; and p(28N2), p(29N2) and
p(30N2) are the rates of production of labelled and unlabelled
N2 species. As the p(28N2) cannot be readily measured, estimation
of D14 was obtained from: D14 = D15 9 p(29N2)/
2p(30N2). The proportion of D14 supported by unlabelled
NO3
– from the water column (Dw) was calculated from:
Dw = D15 9 f/(1-f), where f = mole fraction of 14NO3
– in
the water column. The coupled nitrification–denitrification
(Dn) was calculated as: Dn = D14-Dw.
After denitrification measurements, sediments from all
cores were sieved (mesh size 0.5 mm) for analysis of
macrofauna composition, abundance and biomass. In
addition, all zebra mussels were counted and measured.
The shell free dry weight (SFDW) of each clump was
measured after drying the soft tissue of the mussels at
60 C to a constant weight.
Measurements of D. polymorpha respiration
and excretion rates
Single individuals of D. polymorpha collected from the
lake were selected according to their shell size in order to
cover a wide range of lengths (from *0.5 to *3.0 cm,
n = 30). They were gently brushed in order to remove
epiphytic organisms growing on shells and incubated in the
dark at in situ temperature (16 C) in 250 ml glass bottles
containing lake water from the core incubation tank. Three
to four organisms of the same size were transferred into 12
bottles (oxygen respiration measurements) and into 9 bottles
(nutrient excretion measurements). At the beginning
and at the end of the incubation, approximately 60 ml of
water was collected with plastic syringes from the incubation
tank and from the bottles, respectively, and
transferred to glass and plastic vials for dissolved oxygen
and nutrient (NH4
?, NO3-, SiO2 and PO4
3-) analysis, as
described previously. Incubations were carried out in the
dark and lasted 3 h; mussel respiration and excretion rates
were corrected according to the values obtained when
incubating lake water samples without mussels. At the end
of incubations, the shell free dry weight of each mussel was
measured after drying the soft tissue at 60 C to a constant
weight.
Analytical methods
Dissolved oxygen was determined by iodometric microtitration
(sensitivity 1 lM, APHA 1975), while dissolved
inorganic carbon (TCO2) was measured by microtitration
with 0.1 M HCl (sensitivity 5 lM, Anderson et al. 1986).
Methane (CH4) was measured via gas chromatography
(FISONS 9000 GC, equipped with a flame ionization
detector, sensitivity 0.8 lM). Dissolved nutrients (NH4
?,
NO2
-, NO3-, SiO2 and PO4
3-) were measured with a
continuous flow analyzer (Scan??, Skalar, sensitivity
0.3 lM). DOC was analyzed by high temperature (680 C)
combustion catalytic oxidation/NDIR method using a
Shimadzu TOC-V analyzer (sensitivity 2 lM). The combined
Shimadzu TNM-L unit allowed us to determine total
dissolved nitrogen (TDN) by chemiluminescence. DON
was calculated as a difference between TDN and DIN (sum
of NH4
?, NO2
- and NO3
-). Dissolved Mn2? and Fe2?
were measured by means of atomic absorption (AA240FS,
Varian, sensitivity 0.5 lM). 29N2 and 30N2 were measured
with a membrane inlet mass spectrometer (Bay instruments,
MD, USA). Approximately 1 l of in situ water was
filtered (Whatman, GF/F glass-fiber filters) and chlorophyll
a was extracted overnight from the filter with 90 % acetone
at 4 C. The extracts were centrifuged and chlorophyll
a was measured by spectrophotometry according to
Lorenzen (1967).
Statistical analyses
A simple linear regression analysis was used to examine
the relationship between benthic fluxes and the
measured D. polymorpha biomass as the independent
variable. Differences between slopes were tested by
Student t test. Generalized least squares (GLS) were
used to test the difference between flux rates measured
in sediments with and without D. polymorpha. Two
models were fitted for each flux, the first assuming
homogeneity of variances and the second assuming
different variances for the two treatments. Heterogeneity
of variance was modeled using the function VarIdent in
the nlme package, following the procedure described by
Zuur et al. (2009). Akaike Information Criteria (AIC)
and second order information criteria (AICc) were calculated
in order to select the best model between the
two fitted. AICc presents a correction for small sample
size and it is recommended when the number of the
observations is low with respect to the number of estimated
parameters in the model (Burnham and Anderson
2002). The model with the lowest AIC and AICc value
was selected and then used to test the significance of the
fixed effect using a F test based on the sequential sum
of squares. Statistical significances were set at p\0.05.
Statistical analyses were performed with the packages
nlme (Pinheiro et al. 2013) and AICcmodavg
(Mazerolle 2013) of the statistical software R (R Core
Team 2012).


xresults
General features of the sampling area
At the sampling depth, water temperature was 16 C and
the dominant benthic vegetation was Chara sp. The
concentration of chlorophyll a in bottom water was
2.9 ± 0.4 lg l-1 while that of inorganic nutrients was
0.3 ± 0.1, 4.2 ± 1.1, 2.3 ± 0.4 and 43.5 ± 3.2 lM for
PO4
3-, NH4?, NO3
- and SiO2, respectively. D. polymorpha
was present in small, sparse colonies; the number
of organisms recovered from single cores varied between
a minimum of 15 and a maximum of 109 ind. core-1
(mean ± standard deviation of pooled data 59 ± 33 ind.
core-1), corresponding to densities varying between
3,000 and 21,800 ind. m-2 (mean ± standard deviation
of pooled data 11,822 ± 6,745 ind. m-2). The total
biomass of the mollusk varied between 19.6 and
102.8 gSFDW m-2 and averaged 57.2 ± 25.3 gSFDW m-2.
The large majority of mussels were small (shell size
0.2–1.6 cm), suggesting that the zebra mussel population
at the sampling site consisted mostly of young individuals
(1? and 2? age cohorts). The macrofauna community
also included small chironomids and oligochaetes
(*5,000 ind. m-2 on average), with no differences
between S and S ? D cores.
Sediment respiration in the presence and absence of D.
polymorpha
The presence of zebra mussels resulted in significantly
higher benthic oxygen demand, TCO2 production, Dtot
(Dw ? Dn) and Dw rates (p\0.05, Fig. 2a, c). Zebra
mussel colonies did not have a significant effect on CH4
and Mn2? fluxes (p[0.05, Fig. 2b); ferrous iron concentrations
were always below the detection limits of the
method employed (\0.3 lM). In bare sediments, dark
oxygen demand (2.67 ± 0.41 mmol O2 m-2 h-1) was not
balanced with the production of inorganic carbon
(1.07 ± 0.98 mmol TCO2 m-2 h-1), resulting in a respiratory
quotient significantly less than 1 (0.37 ± 0.36). The
presence of zebra mussels resulted in a similar average
decrease in O2 and increase in TCO2 fluxes, by nearly
5 mmol m-2 h-1. Sediment with zebra mussels consumed
on average 7.85 ± 1.91 mmol O2 m-2 h-1 and produced
6.18 ± 1.61 mmol TCO2 m-2 h-1, resulting in a respiratory
quotient approaching 1 (0.79 ± 0.17) (Fig. 2a).
Oxygen demand and inorganic carbon production increased
linearly with the shell free dry weight of D. polymorpha
recovered from each core, by 81 ± 8 and
77 ± 10 lmol m-2 h-1 gSFDW
-1 , respectively (Fig. 3). The
absolute value of the slopes of the two regression lines was
not significantly different (t test, p[0.05), suggesting that
the identical stimulation of the two benthic fluxes was
mainly due to mussel aerobic metabolism. However, the
intercepts were significantly different, as suggested by the
respiratory quotient calculated for sediments without D.
polymorpha.
Rates of denitrification were generally below
20 lmol N m-2 h-1; on a molar basis the reduction of
NO3
- to N2 represented a small fraction of oxygen demand
measured in bare sediments (\0.5 %) meaning that the
relevance of NO3
- for benthic respiration in this system
was limited (Fig. 2c). The contribution of denitrification to
organic matter mineralization was estimated assuming a
ratio 1.25 C:1 N (mol:mol) between oxidized carbon and
respired nitrogen (Richards 1965). Denitrification was
responsible for a minor fraction of the total dissolved
inorganic carbon flux (at most 15 lmol C m-2 h-1) corresponding
to\2 and\0.5 % of the TCO2 production in
sediment without and with D. polymorpha, respectively.
There was a small but significant difference between rates
of total denitrification measured in the absence and presence
of D. polymorpha (8.9 ± 2.9 and 13.1 ± 3.8
lmol N m-2 h-1 in S and S ? D cores, respectively)
(p\0.05). Both Dw (2.8 ± 0.9 and 4.1 ± 0.8 lmol
N m-2 h-1 in S and S ? D cores, respectively) and Dn
(6.2 ± 2.5 and 9.0 ± 3.4 lmol N m-2 h-1 in S and S ? D
cores, respectively) tended to be higher in the presence of
the mollusks, but only differences in Dw were significant
(p\0.05) (Fig. 2c). In both treatments, Dn sustained the
same dominant fraction of total denitrification (69 %).
Limited in situ reduction of water column nitrate (Dw)
probably reflected the low availability of this electron
acceptor to denitrifiers (2.3 ± 0.4 lM NO3
-, measured in
bottom water at the sampling site). Rates of D15, which is
the denitrification of added 15NO3
- (final concentration
30 lM) were 58.9 ± 18.7 and 90.5 ± 19.2 lmol N m-2 h-1,
in S and S ? D cores, respectively. Rates of Dtot, Dw
and Dn increased linearly with the D. polymorpha
shell free dry weight, by 73 ± 22, 19 ± 6 and
54 ± 20 nmol m-2 h-1 gSFDW
-1 , respectively.
Dissolved nutrient fluxes and stoichiometry
in the presence and absence of D. polymorpha
The presence of mussel colonies resulted in significant
stimulation of inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus fluxes
(Fig. 4a, b). Rates of inorganic nitrogen fluxes were generally
low in bare sediments, with some regeneration of
ammonium and negligible net fluxes of NO2
- (data not
shown) and NO3
-. In contrast, sediments with mussels
recycled greater amounts of inorganic nitrogen, mostly as
NH4
? (Fig. 4a). Ammonium fluxes in bare sediments were
highly variable, with some positive but also some negative
values (26.2 ± 35.2 lmol N m-2 h-1). They were greatly
enhanced, by a factor of *30, in the presence of zebra
mussels (853.2 ± 319.5 lmol N m-2 h-1). No significant
effect of presence/absence of zebra mussels was found
for NO2
- fluxes, which were quantitatively small
(0.1 ± 3.4 lmol N m-2 h-1, pooled data) (p[0.05, data
not shown). However, the efflux of NO3
- was found to be
significantly lower in cores with bare sediment as compared
to sediment with mollusk colonies (2.9 ± 6.8 and
16.1 ± 11.7 lmol N m-2 h-1 at S and S ? D, respectively,
p\0.01) (Fig. 4a). Although NO3
- production
increased in the presence of mussels, NH4
? regeneration
was a major contribution to DIN efflux in both bare sediment
and D. polymorpha populated cores (92 and 98 %,
respectively). Sediment without mussels tended to be a sink
for soluble inorganic phosphorus, though exchange rates
varied considerably (-3.4 ± 6.8 lmol P m-2 h-1)
(Fig. 4b). In the presence of D. polymorpha, the benthic
system regenerated large amounts of PO4
3- (69.6 ±
29.4 lmol P m-2 h-1). Dissolved reactive silica (249.9 ±
120.2 and 352.2 ± 121.0 lmol SiO2 m-2 h-1 at S and
S ? D, respectively) was always released from sediments;
differences between treatments were not significant
(p[0.05) (Fig. 4b).
Inorganic N and P regeneration increased linearly with
the biomass of D. polymorpha. The slopes of the regression
between nutrient fluxes and shell free dry weight of the
zebra mussel were 12.6 ± 1.5, 0.2 ± 0.1 and 1.1 ±
0.1 lmol m-2 h-1 gSFDW
-1 for NH4
?, NO3
- and PO4
3-,
respectively. These slopes were all significantly different
from zero (t test, p\0.001) suggesting that effluxes of the
three nutrients were probably due to direct excretion by the
mussel. Nitrite and reactive silica fluxes were not significantly
correlated with mussel biomass (t test, p[0.05).
Overall, the stoichiometry of C, N and Si regenerated in
sediments without D. polymorpha was 40.7:1 (C:N), suggesting
a refractory nature of the organic matter pool, and of
1:8.8 (N:Si ratio), suggesting a large excess of Si recycling
with respect to N. In the presence of zebra mussels, sediments
regenerated to the water column C, N, Si and P with a
completely different stoichiometry (88.8:12.3:5.1:1), suggesting
some missing Si and relatively low N:P ratio (\20),
which is generally favorable to cyanobacteria.
In the sediments of Plateliai Lake, a large part of the
generated dissolved organic carbon and nitrogen was not
oxidized to CO2 and NH4
? and was released to the overlying
water. DOC and DON fluxes were highly variable
and they were both significantly higher in the presence of
D. polymorpha (p\0.001) (Fig. 4c).
Respiration and nutrient regeneration of isolated D.
polymorpha individuals
Oxygen demand and nutrient excretion rates of individual
mussels were significantly related to body size. Oxygen
respiration of single individuals (3.3 ± 1.3 lmol
O2 ind-1 h-1) increased with shell length, but on a shell
free dry weight basis, D. polymorpha respiration was the
highest (up to 0.4 lmol O2 gSFDW
-1 h-1) in smaller organisms
(shell length\1 cm) (Fig. 5a). Minimum respiration (down
to 0.1 lmol O2 gSFDW
-1 h-1) was determined for mollusks
with shell length [1.7 cm. There was a significant and
positive linear regression between NH4
?, NO3
- and PO4
3-
excretion and zebra mussel shell length, while the dependence
of SiO2 excretion on body size was not significant
(p[0.05) (Fig. 5b–e). However, when normalized by shell
free dry weight, the excretion of nutrients tended to be
independent (for NH4
?) or negatively correlated (for NO3
-,
PO4
3- or SiO2) to shell length, similarly as has been found
for respiration rates. For an individual of average size, we
calculated the stoichiometry of nutrients regenerated by D.
polymorpha as 308(C):39(N):2(Si):1(P). Inorganic carbon
production was derived from oxygen respiration, assuming
a respiratory quotient close to unity for the mussel. In
addition, from the linear relationships reported in Fig. 5 and
the shell lengths of D. polymorpha individuals recovered
from the cores, it was possible to assess the share of mussel
metabolic activity in the total benthic oxygen demand and
nutrient release (Table 1). Oxygen, NH4
? and SiO2 fluxes
generated by zebra mussels had a magnitude comparable to
those measured in intact cores. This suggests that the
activity of D. polymorpha had a major contribution to the
benthic metabolism. Calculated NO3
- production in the
bottles experiment was higher than that measured in cores,
while the opposite was found for reactive phosphorous.

xdiscussion
Effect of D. polymorpha on sediment respiration
In the littoral zone of Plateliai Lake, the consumption of
oxygen and production of inorganic carbon by the benthic
system was stimulated by zebra mussels but their effects on
anaerobic respiration were limited. Results from whole
core and single individual incubations support the direct
role of D. polymorpha as a main contributor to benthic
respiration. Similar results are reported by Effler and
Siegfried (1994), Caraco et al. (2000) and Gardner et al.
(2001) for North American fluvial and lacustrine systems
invaded by the same species. Higher rates of oxygen consumption,
up to 40 mmol O2 m-2 h-1, are reported for D.
polymorpha reefs developing in riverine sites, where mollusc
densities may exceed 50,000 ind. m-2 (Cooley 1991;
Effler and Siegfried 1994; Cope et al. 1997). In lentic
ecosystems, densities are generally lower, usually in the
range of some thousands of individuals per square meter.
Oxygen availability is likely to be a regulatory factor for D.
polymorpha density, as this species does not tolerate poorly
oxygenated waters (Matthews and McMahon 1999).
In Plateliai Lake, the respiratory quotients calculated for
sediments without D. polymorpha were significantly below
one, meaning that a significant fraction of the oxygen
consumption (about 2/3) was used for the reoxidation of
anaerobic metabolism end products (Hargrave et al. 2008).
Large net effluxes of methane and manganese (up to
98 lmol CH4 m-2 h-1 and 29 lmol Mn2? m-2 h-1)
suggest that methanogenesis and manganese reduction are
relevant processes in Plateliai Lake and may explain the
low RQ calculated in bare sediments. In sediments with D.
polymorpha, the respiratory quotient approached unity,
likely due to the dominant role of aerobic mussel respiration
in benthic metabolism. Respiratory quotients above
one can be expected in sediments with mussel beds due to
biodeposition of labile organic matter and dominance of
anaerobic metabolism (Nizzoli et al. 2006). In Plateliai
Lake, respiratory quotients suggest that inputs of organic
carbon to the benthic system are limited or that the settled
material is refractory. In this respect, most of the lake’s
drainage basin is forested by conifers and the main allochtonous
carbon input is represented by needles.
Furthermore, Gardner et al. (2001) did not find evidence of
increased benthic metabolism after adding 3 gdw m-2 of
zebra mussel faeces and pseudofaeces to sandy sediments
and hypothesized that elevated ammonium excretion by the
mussel was coupled to biodeposits with a high C:N ratio
and thus refractory to microbial degradation.
Mussel colonies were an oxygen sink but not to an
extent that resulted in insufficient reoxidation and stimulation
of methane, manganese and iron efflux compared to
bare sediments. However, we cannot exclude the possibility
that increased respiration and biodeposition by the
zebra mussel colonies stimulated anaerobic processes
(Zaiko et al. 2010). Large fluxes of DOC and DON from
sediments with D. polymorpha suggest incomplete oxidation
of dissolved organic matter, which is generally
associated to anaerobic metabolism. In other bioturbation
studies, it was demonstrated that the irrigation activity by
burrowers (N. diversicolor) does not alter the production of
total dissolved carbon (TCO2 ? DOC) but enhances the
proportion of TCO2 in the total flux, due to increased
oxygen availability in pore waters (Papaspyrou et al. 2010).
In contrast, filter feeders such as zebra mussel enhance the
benthic production of both TCO2 and DOC, likely due to
mussel respiration, enhanced hydrolysis and fermentation
of biodeposited particulate organic matter and incomplete
oxidation in an oxygen poor sedimentary environment.
Further evidence of increased anaerobic metabolism in
the presence of D. polymorpha is provided by denitrification
rates, which were stimulated by nearly 45 % in
colonized sediments. In contrast to some freshwaters,
where it represents a significant mineralization pathway,
denitrification in Plateliai Lake accounted for a very low
amount of CO2 production in both bare and zebra mussel
colonized sediments (Seitzinger 1994; Racchetti et al.
2011). We explain the limited total denitrification in this
system by the low concentration of NO3
- in the water
column and the low nitrification rates. The latter process is
regulated by oxygen and NH4
? availability. In sediments
without D. polymorpha, we have no evidence of limited
oxygen supply to nitrifiers while the refractory organic
matter and the inherently low ammonification rates (as
suggested by low NH4
? effluxes), coupled with uptake by
autotrophic organisms (i.e. Chara beds and benthic microalgae),
may strongly limit the availability of ammonium
to nitrifiers. Intact cores with zebra mussel colonies and
incubations of single individuals demonstrated that some
nitrification occurs within or outside mollusks, which is
probably the cause for increased Dw and Dn rates. Nitrification
by bacterial biofilms growing on the surface of D.
polymorpha shells and denitrification activity in the mussel
gut was recently investigated via gas chromatography and
gene expression analysis (Svenningsen et al. 2012). These
authors demonstrated that zebra mussel individuals produce
large amounts of N2O, due to both nitrification and
denitrification and that such production is entirely sustained
by mollusk ammonium excretion.
Bruesewitz et al. (2006, 2009) found higher denitrification
activity in sediments collected below zebra mussel
beds, but animals were excluded and the technique
employed (acetylene inhibition) does not allow direct
comparison to our data. The effect of other species of filter
feeder mollusks on denitrification has been well
documented (Pelegrı´ and Blackburn 1995; Newell et al.
2002; Nizzoli et al. 2006). These studies have revealed a
general stimulation of both denitrification of water column
nitrate and nitrification-coupled denitrification due to the
higher availability of labile organic matter (biodeposition)
and higher oxygen availability within sediments, as a
consequence of diffusion through the siphons to surrounding
sediments. They have also demonstrated that
under circumstances of excessive biodeposition, sulphidic
sediments suppressed denitrification, which in turn was
replaced by other inorganic N-recycling processes as the
dissimilative reduction of NO3
- to NH4
? (DNRA) (Nizzoli
et al. 2006). Our results suggest that sediments with D.
polymorpha are moderately impacted and recently assessed
DNRA rates (data not shown) were found to be low. From
the perspective of organic C mineralization and benthic N
biogeochemistry, the slight stimulation of N2 production by
D. polymorpha is negligible. Calculated denitrification
efficiency, which measures the amount of mineralized
nitrogen lost as dinitrogen gas compared to what is recycled,
reveals that the ratio is low in sediments without the
zebra mussel (*25 %), but it drops to nearly 1.5 % in the
presence of zebra mussels due to the dramatic increase in
excretion (and recycling) of NH4
?.
Effect of D. polymorpha on nutrient flux
and stoichiometry
We demonstrated that the presence of D. polymorpha significantly
affects benthic fluxes of NH4
?, NO3
- and
PO4
3-. In the presence of zebra mussels, Si regeneration
also tended to be higher but compared to inorganic N and P
the degree of stimulation was lower and not statistically
significant. Our results suggest that ammonium excretion
by zebra mussels and NO3
- production by nitrifiers associated
with the mollusks constituted a major fraction of the
corresponding benthic flux while some 40 % of PO4
3-
release came probably from the sediments (Table 1). The
latter aspect should be addressed also in future studies due
to its importance, as it demonstrates the combined impact
of biodeposition and enhanced oxygen consumption on
sediment biogeochemistry. With this respect, our data have
some limits as incubations of a few mussels without sediment
may yield rates that do not reflect those in situ, where
interactions between mollusks, epiphytic organisms and
sediment occur. D. polymorpha is an engineering species
able to modify boundary conditions for dissolved oxygen
transport between the water column and the sediment
(Zaiko et al. 2010). The presence of multiple anoxic niches
within the clumps and at the interface may simultaneously
explain the redox dependent PO4
3- release from the sediment,
the increased nitrate loss via denitrification and the
inefficient oxidation of organic matter, resulting in high
fluxes of DOC and DON (Newell et al. 2005; Svenningsen
et al. 2012).
The consequences of D. polymorpha invasion on nutrient
cycling have been extensively investigated in North
America and, to a lesser extent, in Europe (Stan´czykowska
and Lewandowski 1993; Mellina et al. 1995; Arnott and
Vanni 1996; Conroy and Culver 2005; Bruesewitz et al.
2009; Ozersky et al. 2012). Prior studies have considered
the potential control by this filter feeder on phytoplankton
and how this in turn is regulated by nutrient availability, in
particular N and P (Conroy and Culver 2005; Qualls et al.
2007; De Stasio et al. 2008). The main finding of these
studies is that D. polymorpha recycles large amounts of
nitrogen and phosphorus and that N:P ratios of excreted
nutrients are generally low (\20) and thus potentially
favorable to cyanobacteria (Conroy and Culver 2005). The
trophic level of the invaded environment, stratification and
mixing events are also recognized as key factors modifying
the interactions between mussels, phytoplankton and
nutrients (Dzialowski and Jessie 2009; Cha et al. 2012).
In bottle incubations of isolated zebra mussel individuals,
Gardner et al. (1995) found a significant effect of the
mussel on NH4
? production while there was not a clear and
systematic effect on NO3
-, SiO2 and PO4
3-. In previous
studies, Mellina et al. (1995), Arnott and Vanni (1996) and
Conroy and Culver (2005) measured D. polymorpha
excretion rates of NH4
? and PO4
3- as a function of size
classes and found significant (but different) effects of size
on excretion rates as well. Ranges of reported rates (from
2.5 to 20.0 lmol NH4
? gSFDW
-1 h-1 and from 0.1 to
2.0 lmol PO4
3- gSFDW
-1 h-1) correspond well with our
measured data. However, the range is large as these rates
vary seasonally and also depend upon the size class of the
incubated organism and upon the quality of available seston.
Arnott and Vanni (1996) have measured higher
PO4
3- and lower NH4
? production in smaller individuals,
resulting in a molar ratio of released N:P much lower (*9)
than that of ingested phytoplankton. As small dreissenids
were dominant at their study site (Lake Erie), they concluded
that mollusk activity had a major effect on the
stoichiometry of benthic regeneration and potential implications
for pelagic blooms of cyanobacteria. These results
are similar to those reported in the present study as small
dreissenids were the dominant fraction of the individuals
recovered from the cores.
With respect to the effects of D. polymorpha on benthic
nutrient cycling, the present study provides new insights as
most previous investigations were based on isolated mussels
whilst a few were carried out in intact, undisturbed
sediments with zebra mussel colonies. The study of
Gardner et al. (2001) to our knowledge is one of the few
where the effects of zebra mussel beds on benthic nutrient
exchanges (specifically inorganic N forms) were measured
in situ via benthic chambers. Measured effluxes of
ammonium production varied between 74 and 350 lmol
NH4
? m-2 h-1 and were strongly correlated with zebra
mussel biomass. These rates were lower than those reported
in the present study probably due to lower mollusks
biomass within the chambers (from 0.4 to 19 gSFDW m-2)
compared to that in our cores (up to *100 gSFDW m-2).
Contrary to our findings, Gardner et al. (2001) did not
demonstrate a clear effect of D. polymorpha on nitrate
fluxes. We have measured net nitrate production in intact
cores and in single individual incubations probably due to
D. polymorpha-associated nitrification. Svenningsen et al.
(2012) have demonstrated that a biofilm consisting of
nitrifying bacteria grows on the zebra mussel shell and uses
ammonium made available by the bivalve excretion. As we
have incubated bivalves after cleaning the shell, we speculate
that nitrifiers can be abundant also outside and inside
siphons or in the inner part of the shell. Applying the
nitrate production equation to the size frequency data of the
cores, we obtained much larger NO3
- fluxes than those
measured in the incubation. This can be due to bias
introduced by incubating the mussels alone (i.e. overestimated
rates) or to nitrate removal via denitrification in
anoxic sediments or within anoxic niches in the clumps,
where feces and pseudofeces accumulate.
In Plateliai Lake, the ratio of inorganic N and P regenerated
from sediments with D. polymorpha colonies was
low (12.3:1). Higher availability of P as a consequence of
zebra mussel activity may lead to changes in the structure
of pelagic (Naddafi et al. 2007) and benthic (Burlakova
et al. 2005) communities. The growth of diatoms can be
depressed and that of blue-green algae can be stimulated as
the latter fix atmospheric nitrogen (Arnott and Vanni
1996). Charophytes also may be negatively impacted by
increased benthic nutrient regeneration as a consequence of
epiphytes or phytoplankton growth (Scheffer 1998).
Conclusions
This study confirms that dreissenid mussels can exert significant
control on benthic respiration, benthic nutrient
regeneration and the stoichiometry of nutrients released
from sediments. The presence of zebra mussels coincided
with a significant increase in aerobic respiration, ammonium,
DON and DOC efflux and a shift in sediment
reactive-P flux from negative to positive. Silica fluxes, on
the contrary, were not affected by the mussels. In the
presence of mollusks, there was a small but significant
stimulation of nitrogen loss via denitrification, probably
sustained by nitrate production within the colonies. Such
loss was quantitatively irrelevant for the benthic budget of
nitrogen and was more than compensated by N excretion
and recycling. We conclude that the metabolic activity of
D. polymorpha altered the stoichiometry of benthic nutrient
fluxes as proportionally more N and P than Si were
regenerated to the water column. In lacustrine systems with
limited allochthonous loads, the amount and relative
abundance of nutrients recycled from sediments may
determine the trophic status and composition of primary
producers.