xabstract Invasive crayfish are spreading rapidly
across Europe, where they are replacing the native
crayfish species and impacting negatively on some
other biota. Freshwater crayfish and many benthic
fishes share similar habitat and food requirements and
hence potentially compete for resources. In this study,
we investigated impacts of the introduced signal
crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) on fish in stony
littoral habitats of two large boreal lakes. We
compared the littoral fish community composition
and the densities of two common benthic fish species
between sites with and without crayfish. To evaluate
whether signal crayfish share the same food resources
as benthic littoral fish or change their feeding habits,
we used mixing models and trophic niche estimates
based on analyses of stable isotopes of carbon and
nitrogen. Both the community composition of littoral
fish and the densities of benthic fish species were
similar at sites with and without signal crayfish. Even
though stable isotope signatures indicated strong
dietary overlap between crayfish and benthic fish,
the use of food sources and trophic niche widths of fish
were not noticeably different between crayfish sites
and non-crayfish sites. Our results suggest that, at
current densities, the non-native signal crayfish does
not have significant impacts on benthic fish in the
stony littoral habitats of large boreal lakes. 


xintroduction Invasive species are globally a serious threat to native
species richness and the function of ecosystems (Mack
et al. 2000). Freshwaters are particularly susceptible to
the negative impacts of invaders (Strayer 2010). For
instance, many freshwater crayfish have been spread
anthropogenically beyond their natural distribution
range (Lodge et al. 2000; Holdich et al. 2009) and
recent studies suggest that they can strongly affect
native biota and ecosystem function (Nystro®m et al.
1999; Lodge et al. 2000; McCarthy et al. 2006;
Rosenthal et al. 2006).
Non-indigenous crayfish have the potential to
interact with and hence affect native fish species in
several ways. Many freshwater crayfish and benthic
fish species prefer similar shallow water stony habitats
(Blake and Hart 1993; Guan and Wiles 1997; Fischer 2000) and use the same food resources such as benthic
macroinvertebrates (Welton et al. 1983; Guan and
Wiles 1998; Stenroth et al. 2006). The appearance of a
novel species with an overlapping fundamental niche
potentially exposes indigenous species to direct competition
for resources (e.g. Bergstrom and Mensinger
2009). Crayfish are also effective ecosystem engineers
(Crooks 2002) and might affect the native fish
indirectly by habitat alteration. Crayfish can also
decrease fish survival via direct predation on eggs,
larvae and juveniles (Dorn and Mittelbach 2004;
Mueller et al. 2006).
Reduced fish population densities and growth rates
are often assumed to be related to interspecific
competition for habitat and food resources (Griffiths
et al. 2004; Carpenter 2005; Light 2005; Hirsch and
Fischer 2008). Field surveys in rivers revealed negative
relationships between the abundance of crayfish
and the abundance of benthic fishes (Guan and Wiles
1997; Bubb et al. 2009; Peay et al. 2009). From a long
term survey, Wilson et al. (2004) found that the
invasion of rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus Girard)
also decreased the density of non-predatory fish in a
northern lake. However, the generality of any negative
impacts of crayfish on fish remains in dispute, as
Degerman et al. (2007) did not find any relationships
between native or introduced crayfish and stream fish
communities in an extensive survey in Sweden. Nor
did Stenroth and Nystro®m (2003) find signal crayfish
to affect survival of brown trout (Salmo trutta L.) in a
stream enclosure experiment.
The North American signal crayfish (Pacifastacus
leniusculus Dana) is spreading rapidly across Europe
(Holdich et al. 2009) and is threatening the native
crayfish species (Westman et al. 2002; Bohman et al.
2006). Major impacts on other biota are also evident
(Stenroth and Nystro®m 2003; Bjustro®m et al. 2010). In
this study, we investigated whether the introduced
signal crayfish has impacts on fish populations in the
stony littoral shores of large boreal lakes not originally
inhabited by native crayfish. We compare the littoral
fish community composition and the densities of the
two most common benthic fish, bullhead (Cottus gobio
L.) and stone loach (Barbatula barbatula L.), between
sites with and without crayfish in two large lakes. To
investigate if the non-native crayfish share the same
food resources or change the feeding habits of fish, we
used stable isotope analysis of carbon and nitrogen.
We compare the two categories of habitats with
respect to the trophic structure of the littoral food web,
use of different food sources by littoral benthic fish
and crayfish and the widths of their feeding niches. We
predicted that if crayfish have significant negative
impacts on benthic fish, fish densities should be lower
in the presence of crayfish and the community
composition more dominated by pelagic fish. We also
predicted that the presence of crayfish should increase
inter- and intraspecific competition for food among the
benthic fish, manifested by altered feeding niches. In
particular, we predicted that, in the presence of
crayfish, fish could compensate for increased competition
for littoral benthic prey by increasing their use of
pelagic food sources, as shown previously by Vander
Zanden et al. (1999). 


xmethods 

The study was conducted in 2008 in Lake Pa®ija®nne
(61310N, 25 240E) and in 2009 in Lake Saimaa
(61150N, 25 130E) which are the largest lakes in
Finland (Table 1; Fig. 1). Signal crayfish introductions
to these lakes started in the 1990s (Finnish Game
and Fisheries Research Institute, crayfish introduction
register). The natural distribution of the only native
crayfish species, noble crayfish (Astacus astacus L.),
was mainly confined to southern rivers and small lakes
(Ja®rvi 1910), and the open water parts of these large
lakes were not previously inhabited by crayfish.
Finnish inland waters are mostly privately owned
and lakes are usually divided into several management
areas administered by their own shareholder associations
(Sipponen 2001). Different shareholder associations
have discrete fisheries management policies and strategies on which the introduction of signal crayfish
mainly depends. Even though signal crayfish also
disperse naturally within the lakes, all shores are not
yet colonised due to the complex shore structure and
the large size of the lakes (Ruokonen T unpublished).
Hence, the distribution of signal crayfish in our study
lakes is still patchy, providing an excellent opportunity
to study the impacts of this non-indigenous species in
large-scale natural settings. In each lake, we selected
for study five stony littoral sites with signal crayfish
population and five otherwise similar sites without
crayfish (Fig. 1). Crayfish populations in the selected
crayfish sites are well established, reproduce naturally
and support commercial and recreational fisheries. To
avoid spatial bias we tried to ensure that the crayfish
and non-crayfish sites were both distributed equally
around the lakes in longitudinal and latitudinal
directions (Fig. 1).
All sites were trapped at the end of July to estimate the
abundance of crayfish (catch per unit effort, CPUE)
and to ensure the absence of crayfish at control sites. At
each site, 25 cylindrical traps baited with fresh roach
(Rutilus rutilus L.) were set in the 1ñ3 m depth zone
along the shore at 5 metre intervals during the evening
and collected the following morning. Since the crayfish
traps are size-selective (Abrahamsson and Goldman
1970), the method provides an estimate of adult
crayfish density ([30 mm in carapace length). At the
control sites, the absence of crayfish was additionally
confirmed with visual observations by a scuba diver.
The stony littoral sites were electrofished in August
with batteryñpowered backpack electrofishing gear
(GeOmega FA4, Geomega AS, Sjetnemarka, Norway)
to estimate the fish density and species composition of
the communities. A pulsed (50 Hz) 350 V direct
current was used at all sites. A three pass-removal
method without enclosure nets was used to collect the
fish. Electrofishing was conducted along the shore line
so that the maximum sampled depth was ca 80 cm.
The sampled area varied from 100 to 250 m2. Each
captured fish individual was identified to species,
measured for total length and weighed. The total
amount of fish caught with the three pass-removal
method was used as the minimum population density
estimate (individuals per 100 m2 for each species) in
the analysis of community composition. To ensure
accuracy, population density estimates using the Junge
and Libovarsky equation (Bohlin et al. 1989) were
calculated only for the two most abundant benthic fish species, bullhead and stone loach, which are known to
be local in littoral areas throughout most of their life
cycles (Wanzenbock et al. 2000; Hofmann and Fischer
2001).
Habitat type and environmental variables are important
in structuring lake littoral communities (Fischer
2000; Tolonen et al. 2001; Nystro®m et al. 2006).
Therefore, we attempted to select study sites as similar
as possible in habitat structure. The factors which are
known to shape the structure of littoral communities
were measured to control for the environmental
variation among sites. However, there were no differences
in the measured environmental factors between
crayfish and non-crayfish sites within each lake
(Table 2).
All selected sites were open stony shores without
macrophytes. Substrate particle size at 0.5 m depth
was estimated from three replicate plots enclosed with
a metallic frame (surface area 0.25 m2) using a
modified Wentworthís scale (Allan 1995). The percentage
cover of each size category was estimated
visually and a percentage-weighted average of the
midpoints of the category ranges was calculated for
each replicate plot, and then averaged for the site.
Shore slope was determined by measuring the distance
from the shore line to 0.5 m depth from three adjacent
lines perpendicular to the shore line. Slope for each
measure was expressed as the angle between bottom
and water surface. An average of three measurements
was used as the shore slope. The wind-induced
disturbance (relative exposure) at each shore was
calculated from wind and fetch measurements
according to Brodersen (1995). Relative exposure
combines the wind fetch, the mean wind velocity,
wind direction and sampling depth (0.5 m) into a
single index. Mean wind values for 2006ñ2008 from
the nearest observation stations of the Finnish Meteorological
Institute were used for the calculations.
Periphyton chlorophyll-a (mg m2) was used as a
measure of site productivity. Periphyton samples were
taken from three depth zones (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 m) at
each site. From each depth, one pooled sample (total
area of 48.1 cm2) consisting of five random subsamples
were taken from flat stone surfaces using a brush
sampler. Each sample was filtered onto a glass fibre
filter and frozen. In the laboratory, chlorophyll-a
concentrations were analyzed according to Finnish
standard SFS 5772.
Fish and crayfish samples for stable isotope analysis
(SIA) were collected from Saimaa in August 2009 at
three sites with a dense crayfish population and three
sites without crayfish (Fig. 1). From each site 10
bullheads and 10 stone loaches were collected while
electrofishing. In the laboratory, weight and total
length were measured and a piece of white muscle
tissue was dissected from posterior to the dorsal fin.
Adult crayfish (carapace length[30 mm) for SIA
were sampled by crayfish traps. Smaller crayfish were
collected by a scuba diver or by using a pump sampler.
From each site, 24ñ29 signal crayfish (size range
6ñ81 mm in carapace length) were collected.
Untreated abdominal muscle tissue was used to
measure the stable isotope ratios of each signal
crayfish as recommended by Stenroth et al. (2006). Other components of the littoral food web were also
collected to illustrate the trophic structure and reveal
the position of benthic fish and crayfish in the littoral
food web. Larvae of six common macroinvertebrate
taxa (an omnivore Asellus aquaticus, grazing mayflies
Heptagenia fuscogrisea Retzius and Baetidae spp., a
collector/shredder stonefly Leuctra fusca L., a filter
feeding caddisfly Polycentropus flavomaculatus Pictet
and predatory non-biting midges Tanypodinae spp.)
were collected to represent the littoral consumers
assumed to be preyed upon by crayfish and benthic
fish. For each taxon and site, carbon and nitrogen
isotope ratios were analyzed from a bulk sample
containing 4ñ8 animal specimens. Filter-feeding mussels
(Sphaerium corneum L.) and bulk zooplankton
samples were collected to represent food sources
originating from the pelagic food web. The zooplankton
samples were gathered using a 100-lm mesh net
pulled vertically through the water column in the
pelagic area corresponding to each littoral sampling
site. Samples were frozen and later in the laboratory,
any predatory cladocerans and other items were
removed manually under a microscope to leave only
phytophagous cladocerans, cyclopoids and calanoid
copepods in the samples. Periphyton was used to
represent the littoral primary production. At each site
samples were brushed from flat surfaces of five stones
from three depths (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 m) and analysed as
bulk samples for each depth. Fallen leaves of birch
(Betula pendula L.) and alder (Alnus glutinosa L.)
were collected from the shoreline to represent terrestrial
detritus. All samples for SIA were freeze-dried to
constant weight and powdered for analysis.
Carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes were analysed
using a Carlo Erba Flash EA 1112 elemental analyser
connected to a Thermo Finnigan DELTAplusAdvantage
continuous-flow isotope ratio mass spectrometer
(CF-IRMS). The reference materials used were internal
standards of known relation to the international
standards of Vienna Pee Dee belemnite (for carbon)
and atmospheric N2 (for nitrogen). White muscle
tissue of pike (Esox lucius L.) and potato leaves
(Solanum tuberosum L.) with known isotopic compositions
were used as internal working standards to
ensure the precision of analyses. Two replicate
standards were run after every six samples in each
sequence. Internal precision of analyses was better
than 0.12%for carbon and 0.13% for nitrogen, based
on the standard deviation of replicates of the standards.
The SIAR-package in R (Parnell et al. 2010) was used
to create a two source mixing model to estimate the
proportions of littoral and pelagic food sources used
by bullhead and stone loach at crayfish and noncrayfish
sites. This Bayesian approach allows consideration
of the variation and uncertainty in isotopic
values of consumers and food sources, and it also takes
into account the trophic enrichment factors and
different assimilation of food sources (Parnell et al.
2010). Individual models were created for both species
and for all sites.
The mean values and standard deviations of
isotopic values of four benthic invertebrate taxa
(Asellus aquaticus L., Heptagenia fuscogrisea Retzius,
Baetidae spp. and Leuctra fusca L.) which use
periphyton and detrital material as main food sources
were used as a littoral baseline for each site. Lake
littorals are open systems and therefore, some part of
the energy consumed there can be supposed to
originate from the pelagic food web (Post 2002). As
recommended by Post (2002), long living filterfeeding
mussels were used as the pelagic baseline.
As no species-specific trophic enrichment factors were
available for bullhead and stone loach, values presented
in the literature were used in the models:
3.23 ± 0.41 for d15N and 0.47 ± 1.23 for d13C
(Vander Zanden and Rasmussen 2001). Carbon and
nitrogen percentages measured in SIA (mean and
standard deviation calculated for each source) were
incorporated into the models to account for the
different assimilation of carbon and nitrogen originating
from different food sources (Parnell et al. 2010).
Results of mixing models are presented as proportions
of littoral and pelagic food sources with 50, 75 and
95% Bayesian credibility intervals.
The variation in stable isotope values is commonly
used to measure the width of trophic (feeding) niches
and to assess changes or differences in food web
structures (e.g. Layman et al. 2007b; Olsson et al.
2009). The population level trophic niche width (total
area, TA) of stone loach, bullhead and crayfish were
determined from d15N and d13C values by calculating
the convex hull encompassed by the smallest convex
polygon containing the individuals from each site in d15N and d13C niche space (Layman et al. 2007a).
Convex hull areas were calculated and visualised
using the adehabitat- package in R (Calenge 2006).
Differences in signal crayfish mean catch and size
(carapace length) were compared between the lakes
with Studentís t tests. The patterns of variation in the
fish community composition among crayfish study
sites were explored and illustrated by non-metric
multidimensional scaling (NMS) ordination, using
data on mean densities of fish species and Bray-Curtis
distance measure. Differences in fish community
composition between crayfish and non-crayfish sites
were tested with analysis of similarities (ANOSIM).
NMS and ANOSIM were performed with the
VEGAN-package in R (Oksanen et al. 2010). The
mean density, length and weight of the two most
common benthic littoral fish (stone loach and bullhead)
were compared between crayfish and noncrayfish
sites using two-factor ANOVAs (crayfish
status as the fixed factor of interest and lake as another
factor to control for difference between lakes). All
statistical analyses were performed with R 2.10.1 (R
Development Core Team 2009).
xresults The mean crayfish CPUE in Pa®ija®nne at selected
crayfish sites was 3.71 with range from 1.5 to 8.6
crayfish per trap per night among sites. In Saimaa the
mean CPUE was slightly lower (mean 2.88 with range
from 0.8 to 6.4) but there was no statistically significant
difference in CPUE between the lakes (t = 0.5,
df = 8, P = 0.630). The mean carapace length of crayfish
in Pa®ija®nne was 49.4 mm and in Saimaa 47.4 mm,
showing no difference (t = 0.817, df = 8, P = 0.444)
between the lakes. No crayfish were observed at the
non-crayfish sites of either of the study lakes. In both lakes the most common fish species in stony
littoral areas were stone loach, bullhead and Eurasian
minnow (Phoxinus phoxinus L.). Some burbot (Lota
lota L.), ruffe (Gymnocephalus cernuus L.), Eurasian
perch (Perca fluviatilis L.), ninespine stickleback
(Pungitius pungitius L.) and roach (Rutilus rutilus
L.) were also caught. In the NMS analyses (Pa®ija®nne:
final stress = 8.78; Saimaa: final stress = 5.99), study
sites were placed in the ordination space without
evident aggregation of sites according to crayfish
status (Fig. 2). ANOSIM did not show significant
differences in fish community composition between
crayfish and non-crayfish sites (Pa®ija®nne: R = -0.1,
P = 0.764; Saimaa: R = -0.092, P = 0.83). The analysis of variance did not reveal significant
differences in the mean density of stone loach
(F = 0.801, df = 1, P = 0.376) or bullhead (F =
3.595, df = 1, P = 0.076) between crayfish and noncrayfish
sites (Fig. 3a). In Saimaa, the mean densities
of both species were significantly higher than in
Pa®ija®nne (stone loach: F = 42.856, df = 1, P\
0.001; bullhead: F = 55.290, df = 1, P\0.001).
The results did not indicate significant interactions
between lake and crayfish status (stone loach:
F = 2.023, df = 1, P = 0.174; bullhead: F = 1.992,
df = 1, P = 0.177).
The mean length of stone loach (F = 0.607, df = 1,
P = 0.448) and bullhead (F = 0.607, df = 1,
P = 0.448) did not differ between the crayfish and
non-crayfish sites (Fig. 3b). No significant differences
were found in mean weights of stone loaches
(F = 0.001, df = 1, P = 0.992) or bullheads (F =
0.059, df = 1, P = 0.812) between the crayfish and
non-crayfish sites (Fig. 3c). However, both species
were longer (stone loach: F = 16.098, df = 1, P =
0.001; bullhead: F = 47.736, df = 1, P\0.001) and
heavier (stone loach: F = 12.744, df = 1, P = 0.003;
bullhead: F = 18.171, df = 1, P\0.001) in lake
Pa®ija®nne (Fig. 3b, c). Results did not indicate interactions
between lake and crayfish status in length or
weight of stone loach and bullhead (P[0.06 for all
tests).


 Overall, the mean trophic structure of the littoral food
web was rather uniform in the presence and absence
of signal crayfish (Fig. 4). Mean d15N-values of periphyton were low (1.2%) in both groups, and
relatively wide variation in d13C-values reveals
differences in basal carbon resources among the study
sites. A wide range in macroinvertebrate d15N and
d13C-values reflects the different diets among taxa and
differences in basal resources among the sites. Nevertheless,
mussels and zooplankton had clearly lower
d13C-values reflecting the different carbon sources of
the phytoplankton-driven pelagic food web (Fig. 4).
Benthic fish had the highest d15N-values ranging from
7.4 to 10.8%in bullhead and from 6.3 to 8.3%in stone
loach, indicating that they are the top-predators among
the sampled groups. Bullheads had slightly higher
d15N and d13C than stone loaches (Fig. 4). Signal
crayfish d15N-values ranged from 5.6 to 9.6%, and
were situated between the bullheads and stone loaches
in mean trophic level (Fig. 4). Crayfish had a wide
range in d13C-values (from -14.0 to -24.3%) which
overlapped with both fish species. The diet of stone loach consisted mainly of littoral
food sources at all sites (Fig. 5a). The estimated
contribution of littoral food sources to the diet of stone
loach varied between 79 and 100% (95% CI) at
crayfish sites and between 65 and 100% (95% CI) at
non-crayfish sites The contribution of pelagic food to
diet was slightly higher in bullhead than in stone loach
(Fig. 5b). However, bullheads at crayfish sites utilized
mostly littoral food sources (59ñ99%)(95% CI),
whereas there was more variation in diet among the
non-crayfish sites. At sites four and six, bullheads
utilized littoral and pelagic food sources almost
equally (Fig. 5b), while at site five, the littoral food
sources represented the main part of bullhead diet
(74ñ100%) (95% CI). The trophic niches of stone loach and bullhead
measured in d15N and d13C space were clearly
separated from each other at all sites independent of
the presence or absence of crayfish (Fig. 6). The
population level trophic niche width (TA) of bullhead
varied from 2.80 to 4.36 at crayfish sites, whereas
variation at non-crayfish sites was slightly wider
(2.33ñ6.04). For stone loach, there was less variation
in d15N values within the populations and total areas of
feeding niches were smaller than for bullhead (Fig. 6).
The TAs for stone loach populations were 2.66ñ3.38 at
crayfish sites and 1.52ñ2.91 at sites without crayfish.
The niche widths of signal crayfish populations were
much larger (6.33ñ14.74) and overlapped with both
fish species (Fig. 6) at all sites. Also the variation in
crayfish d15N and d13C values within populations was
wider than for both fish species. xdiscussion
 Overall, the results of our study suggest that the
presence of non-native signal crayfish does not have
significant impacts on benthic littoral fish in our study
lakes, in sharp contrast to our a priori expectations.
The littoral fish community composition was similar at
sites with and without signal crayfish, and the local
densities of benthic fish species were not reduced in the presence of crayfish. Although our stable isotope
results suggested that signal crayfish utilized the same
basal resources as benthic fish, the basal food sources
utilised and the trophic niche widths of stone loach and
bullhead were comparable at crayfish sites and noncrayfish
sites.
The few previous investigations of the impacts of
non-native crayfish on lentic fish are from smaller
lakes with abundant vegetation, whereas less is known
from exposed and stony littoral areas, especially of
larger lakes. Wilson et al. (2004) found that invasion
of rusty crayfish had long-term negative impacts on
several non-predatory fish species. They proposed that
reduction of habitats (loss of macrophytes), competition
for prey and direct predation on eggs were the
main reasons for negative impacts. Roth et al. (2007)
also found negative impacts of crayfish on fish to be
related mainly to loss of macrophytes. Hirsch and
Fischer (2008) speculated on the basis of a laboratory
experiment, that invasive crayfish might negatively
affect lake littoral benthic fish communities by shelter
competition. Benthic fish and crayfish are both mainly active nocturnally and during daytime seek shelter
(e.g. under stones) to avoid fish and avian predators
(Welton et al. 1991; Hill and Lodge 1994). Several
river studies (Griffiths et al. 2004; Light 2005; Bubb
et al. 2009) have also pointed to the importance of
shelter competition as a reason behind decreased fish
densities with crayfish occupancy.
Our study sites were stony shores without vegetation,
and the shallow water areas (\3 m) were
continuously covered with small to medium size
stones providing an apparently ample supply of
suitable habitat for benthic fish and crayfish along
the lake shores. Therefore, we assume that in such
lakes, with the observed crayfish densities, the availability
of shelter is not limited and this might explain
why the presence of crayfish did not alter the fish
densities in these lakes. Instead our results did reveal
significant differences in fish densities between the
two study lakes. Mean densities of stone loach and
bullhead in both groups were consistently higher in
Saimaa than in Pa®ija®nne. This difference might be
explained by higher productivity at Saimaa, as indicated
by higher periphyton chlorophyll-a concentrations
(Table 2). In a previous study of Pa®ija®nne, Bagge
and Hakkari (1992) found that bullheads and stone
loach were most abundant at gently sloping shores
with small stones. In our study, shore slopes were
significantly steeper in Lake Pa®ija®nne which might
also explain the general difference between the lakes
in mean fish densities.
Invasive crayfish are known to alter the macroinvertebrate
community composition and reduce the
biomass and taxonomic richness directly by feeding,
or indirectly by, for example, habitat destruction
(Nystro®m et al. 1999; Stenroth and Nystro®m 2003;
McCarthy et al. 2006). Increased competition for food
resources between invading crayfish and native fish is
reported to be one potential cause of decline in fish
populations and growth (Carpenter 2005; Wilson et al.
2004). Decreased food can even lead to changes in
usage of basal food sources, from littoral to more
pelagic prey (Vander Zanden et al. 1999). The results
of our stable isotope analysis suggest that signal
crayfish utilize the same basal resources as benthic fish
and justify our expectations about potential food
competition at the crayfish sites. The observed high
d15N values of signal crayfish and their position
between the two fish species in a littoral trophic
structure agrees with recent studies (Stenroth et al.
2006; Olsson et al. 2008) indicating that crayfish
do mainly consume animals such as benthic
macroinvertebrates.
Previous investigations of the feeding habits and
activity of stone loach and bullhead in rivers or in
experimental studies have indicated that macroinvertebrates
comprise the main part of the diet of both
species (e.g. Hyslop 1982; Welton et al. 1991). The
feeding habits of these fish in lakes and the importance
of pelagic food sources (e.g. zooplankton) in their
diets are less well known, even though some studies
have indicated that zooplankton might comprise at
least some part of the diet (Sauvonsaari 1971). Our
results indicate that the overall contribution of pelagic
food sources to bullhead diet was higher than for stone
loach. Bullheads are visual predators and therefore,
better suited to capturing zooplankton than non-visual
stone loaches (Hyslop 1982; Welton et al. 1983).
The outputs from the two-source mixing models
indicate that stone loaches mostly used food originating
from littoral sources in both habitat categories.
This suggests that the presence of signal crayfish does
not cause appreciable changes in the diet of stone
loach. In the case of bullhead, however, there was
some tendency towards an apparently higher littoral
diet contribution in the presence of crayfish. This
response is opposite to our original expectations, but is
relatively weak and inconsistent and we cannot
confidently attribute it to the presence of crayfish. At
crayfish sites, the variation in contribution of littoral
and pelagic sources was rather low, whereas among
non-crayfish sites the model outputs showed more
variation. At two of these sites, the bullheads used
littoral and pelagic food sources almost equally, while
at one site the contribution of littoral sources was
strongly dominant.
Disturbances or changes in ecosystem structures
can alter an organismís resource use which can be seen
as changes in the trophic niche width (Layman et al.
2007b). For example, increased intraspecific competition
for food resources has been shown to increase
niche width (Svanba®ck and Boldnick 2007). Our
results support previous findings that the feeding
habits of stone loach and bullhead differ from each
other and that resource partitioning might be the key
factor, which enables coexistence of these two species
with apparently similar ecology (Hyslop 1982; Welton
et al. 1983, 1991). The well-defined separation of
stone loach and bullhead populations and their similar location in the trophic niche space at both site
categories suggests that the presence of crayfish does
not markedly change the use of basal food sources.
Our results also suggest that the population-level
trophic niche widths of littoral fish were not different
between the crayfish and non-crayfish sites.
Lake littorals are open systems without strict
physical boundaries (Strayer and Findlay 2010), and
therefore, invasion and supply of new fish from noncrayfish
areas might occur. In general, littoral fish are
poor colonizers, and are not able to disperse across
open water areas (Markert et al. 1999). Barluenga and
Meyer (2005) argued that dispersal of stone loach is
restricted by open water areas and colonization occurs
mainly along the shorelines, whereas Wanzenbock
et al. (2000) found that bullheads may have a pelagic
early life phase, which could facilitate colonization of
new areas. In our study, the shortest distance between
crayfish and non-crayfish sites was 4 km separated by
large open water areas (Fig. 1), and to our knowledge
there is no evidence for a pelagic early life phase in
bullhead in our study lakes. Therefore, we presume
that movements of the studied fish species between
non-crayfish and crayfish areas are minor and would
not affect our results. Our findings that the fish mean
densities and weights did not differ between the
crayfish and non-crayfish sites suggest that the size
structure of fish populations within these groups was
similar. If colonization by bullhead was occurring at a
large scale, the population structure should be biased
towards small specimens at crayfish sites.
Negative impacts of invasive species are not
necessarily seen immediately after successful establishment
and native species also react to disturbances
with different time lags (Williamson 1996). For
example, long-lived organisms like fish need longer
exposure to increasing crayfish abundance, while
densities of benthic macroinvertebrates can be influenced
soon after crayfish appearance (Wilson et al.
2004). Signal crayfish have been present in our study
areas for 10ñ15 years (Finnish Game and Fisheries
Research Institute crayfish introduction register) and
both stone loach and bullhead have a short life span
and mature early (Sauvonsaari 1971; Wanzenbock
et al. 2000), so by now several fish generations have
been exposed to the presence of crayfish. Hence the
time elapsed since the establishment of crayfish
populations in the study lakes should be long enough
to reveal any important impacts on fish.
Our results suggest that introduced signal crayfish
does not currently have major impacts on benthic fish
in stony littoral shores of our study lakes. However,
rising commercial catches indicate that the signal
crayfish populations are still in a growth phase in these
lakes (Finnish Game and Fisheries Research Institute
unpublished) and therefore, we cannot exclude the
possibility of negative impacts in future. For example,
Bjustro®m et al. (2010) found that littoral macroinvertebrate
communities in Pa®ija®nne were altered at sites
with high crayfish density, which indicates the
potential of signal crayfish to change ecosystem
functions in lake littorals. Our results support the
view of Degerman et al. (2007) that effects of nonnative
crayfish should be investigated case-specifically
in different habitats and between different
species.