xabstract
1. Invasive crayfish are widely acknowledged to have negative effects on benthic food webs in lakes,
but few studies have investigated such effects at wider spatial scales and in varying habitats under
natural conditions.
2. We examined the effects of introduced signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) on the macroinvertebrate
assemblages of different habitats in two large boreal lakes. We evaluated whether the density,
taxon richness and species composition are altered by the non-native crayfish and whether the
responses are similar for stony and vegetated habitats and across a depth gradient. We also studied
the influence of crayfish on periphyton biomass at stony sites, as a potential link to changes in macroinvertebrate
communities.
3. In both lakes, macroinvertebrate density was similar between crayfish and non-crayfish sites across
the habitats and depths studied. However, macroinvertebrate taxon richness was significantly lower,
and community composition was altered in the presence of crayfish at stony sites. No similar pattern
was detected at vegetated sites or in deeper sublittoral areas. The amount of periphyton was similar
regardless of the presence of crayfish, and no clear direct or indirect crayfish–periphyton interaction
was detected.
4. Our results suggest that introduced signal crayfish can have negative effects on the littoral macroinvertebrates
of large boreal lakes, but that these effects are habitat specific. Our findings highlight
how the evaluation of possible effects of invasive species needs to be carried out comprehensively
across different habitats and spatial scales if conclusions are to be robust.

xintroduction
Fresh waters are among the most threatened environments
in the world (Strayer & Dudgeon, 2010), and the
spread of non-native species is a major reason for
decreased biodiversity and impaired ecosystem processes
(Dudgeon et al., 2006; Strayer, 2010). Crayfish are among
the most effective invaders worldwide, establishing large
populations in all kinds of waterbodies (Lodge et al., 2000;
Holdich et al., 2009). In lakes, the shallow littoral supports
high biodiversity (Strayer & Findlay, 2010) and is
important in whole-lake energy flow (Vadeboncoeur,
Vander Zanden & Lodge, 2002; Vander Zanden et al.,
2006). Unfortunately, these diversity hotspots have been
extensively altered by human activities (Dudgeon et al.,
2006) and are also the preferred habitat of crayfish
(Westman, Savolainen & Julkunen, 2002; Nystr€om et al.,
2006). Many studies suggest that non-native crayfish, as
omnivores and effective ecosystem engineers, can have
detrimental effects on the native biota (e.g. Nystr€om,
Br€onmark & Graneli, 1999; Wilson et al., 2004; McCarthy
et al., 2006) with their scale of influence ranging from
changes in the population size of single species up to
impacts on ecosystem processes (Covich, Palmer & Crowl,
1999; Crooks, 2002; Pulkkinen et al., 2013).
Non-native crayfish can substantially change assemblages
of littoral macroinvertebrates by direct and
indirect pathways. Previous studies have shown that
crayfish predation can strongly decrease populations of
slow-moving macroinvertebrates, and of snails in particular
(Nystr€om et al., 1999; Wilson et al., 2004; McCarthy
et al., 2006). The consequent reduction in snail grazing
could increase periphyton biomass (Lodge et al., 1994;
Nystr€om et al., 1999, 2001) and thus indirectly benefit
other grazers less sensitive to crayfish predation. However,
omnivorous crayfish could also compete for food
with other macroinvertebrates by feeding on attached
algae and detritus (Nystr€om, 1999; Gherardi & Lazzara,
2006).
Most previous studies on the effects of non-native
crayfish on littoral macroinvertebrates have been
small-scale experiments conducted in the laboratory, or
in outdoor artificial ponds or enclosures. Although studies
at more realistic spatial and temporal scales suggest
that the effects on macroinvertebrates are similar across
varying spatial scales (Wilson et al., 2004; McCarthy
et al., 2006; Rosenthal, Stevens & Lodge, 2006; Nilsson
et al., 2012), recent results also suggest that the effects of
invasive crayfish may vary, depending on the characteristics
of the ecosystem invaded (Stenroth et al., 2008;
Klose & Cooper, 2012). Impacts of crayfish might also be
specific to different prey species. Therefore, there is an
obvious need to investigate the effects of non-native
crayfish in varying relevant environmental settings (e.g.
Degerman et al., 2007; Ruokonen et al., 2012a,b). In this
context, information is still lacking on how signal crayfish
(Pacifastacus leniusculus) affect macroinvertebrates
under natural conditions in large boreal lakes, which are
presently among the most important habitats in Europe
for this introduced species. Direct extrapolation of
results from small-scale studies to such large ecosystems
might be misleading, since the environmental conditions
and ecological processes are influenced by lake size and
may differ substantially between small and large lakes
(e.g. Vadeboncoeur et al., 2002). Moreover, large lakes
typically contain extensive littoral patches of contrasting
habitat types with differing conditions and assemblages
(e.g. Tolonen et al., 2001) and hence with potentially
differing responses to crayfish invasions.
Habitat complexity is known to affect predator–prey
interactions in aquatic environments in several ways
(reviewed in Kovalenko, Thomaz & Warfe, 2012). For
example, encounters between predator and prey might
be less probable in complex habitats or, alternatively,
prey could actively use habitat structures as a shelter
(Persson & Eklov, 1995). Aquatic vegetation strongly
affects the structure of littoral macroinvertebrate
communities (Theel, Dibble & Madsen, 2008), and the
physical complexity created by macrophytes supports
high invertebrate biomass and diversity (Diehl, 1992;
Tolonen et al., 2003). Hard-stemmed macrophyte stands,
which are less affected by crayfish (e.g. Nystr€om &
Strand, 1996), could act as a refuge for invertebrates
such as snails, which are known to have behavioural
escape responses in the presence of crayfish predator
(Nystr€om & Perez, 1998; Turner, Bernot & Boes, 2000).
Habitat features could also influence predator densities,
and signal crayfish are thought to prefer stony rather
than vegetated habitats in areas where they have
invaded (Westman et al., 2002).
Littoral habitat type strongly determines littoral
macroinvertebrates (Tolonen et al., 2001; Johnson &
Goedkoop, 2002), whose assemblage structure is quite
different on stony and vegetated shores of large lakes,
although in both habitats, invertebrate abundances and
species composition change similarly from shallow to
deeper water (Tolonen et al., 2001). The distribution of
crayfish might also differ with depth (Rajala, 2006), and
hence, these factors together might make the effects of
crayfish depth dependent.
Our main aim of this study was to examine the effects
of introduced signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) on
the macroinvertebrate assemblages of different habitats
in large boreal lakes. More specifically, we expected that
(i) the overall macroinvertebrate density and species
richness would be lower in the presence of crayfish; (ii)
the density and species richness of snails, which are
especially vulnerable to crayfish, would be heavily
reduced by crayfish; (iii) the macroinvertebrate assemblage
composition would be consistently different
between sites with and without crayfish; and (iv) the
responses to crayfish would be different between stony
and vegetated habitats and less pronounced at vegetated
sites due to more complex habitat structure and lower
crayfish density. We also asked whether the impacts of
crayfish are similar across littoral and sublittoral areas.
Since crayfish could have complex influences on periphyton
directly by grazing or indirectly by influencing
other macroinvertebrate grazers, the impacts of crayfish
on the biomass of periphyton growing on stony substrata
were also studied, as a potential ‘bottom-up’ link
to changes in macroinvertebrate communities. The outcomes
of crayfish impacts on periphyton biomass are
difficult to predict, but two alternatives could be
expected: (i) periphyton biomass would be higher in the
presence of crayfish, due to decreased snail grazing
pressure; and (ii) no change in periphyton biomass, due
to direct feeding on algae by omnivorous crayfish or the
replacement of snails by other grazers.

xmethods
The study was conducted in 2008 at Lake P€aij€anne
(61°31′N, 25°24′E) and in 2009 at Lake Saimaa (61°15′N,
25°13′E) (Fig. 1), the two largest lakes in Finland. Signal
crayfish were introduced to the study lakes 10–15 years
ago (Finnish Game and Fisheries Institute, crayfish introduction
register) and they reproduce naturally. The
natural distribution of the only native Finnish crayfish
(Astacus astacus) was confined mainly to rivers and small
lakes, and the open water of the study lakes was not
previously inhabited by crayfish (J€arvi, 1910). The overall
distribution of signal crayfish in the study lakes is
still patchy, since the lakes are divided into several
management units. These areas are administered by
their own shareholder associations which have decided
whether or not to introduce signal crayfish. Even though
signal crayfish also spread naturally within the lakes,
their spread is relatively low (Bubb, Thom & Lucas,
2004). The present situation thus provides an excellent
opportunity to study the effects of invading signal crayfish
in a large-scale natural setting.
In each lake, five sites with signal crayfish and five
otherwise similar sites without crayfish were selected
(Fig. 1). At each site, a stony habitat and the nearest vegetated
habitat were studied. In general, the shores of the
study lakes are mostly stony with a broad belt of cobbles
and boulders. Sheltered bays and less steep shores
are typically covered with dense stands of common reed
(Phragmites australis), a native and dominant macrophyte
in the area. The stony shores selected were open and
without macrophytes, and the bed was composed of
mixed size cobbles (Table 1) from the shoreline to a
depth of 2–2.5 m. Each vegetated site selected was 50–
200 m distant from the corresponding stony site and
was covered from the shore to 2–2.5 m depth by dense
stands of common reed. At vegetated sites, the bottom
was soft (fine silt/sand or mud) and contained decomposing
macrophytes and terrestrial detritus (around
0.5 m depth in particular). Crayfish are known to affect
macrophytes negatively, but to prefer species with soft
tissues (Olsen et al., 1991; Nystr€om & Strand, 1996).
Therefore, we expected that any impact of crayfish on
common reed, which has hard stems, would be minor,
and therefore, vegetated sites would be similar between
crayfish and non-crayfish sites.
Tolonen et al. (2001) found that in the various basins
of Lake Saimaa, factors related to habitat type explained
most of the variation in the taxonomic and functional
composition of littoral macroinvertebrate assemblages.
Hence, we presumed that the macroinvertebrate assemblage
at the study sites was similar within similar habitats
before the introduction of crayfish. In addition, the
main habitat features known to shape the structure of
littoral communities were measured, to control for possible
variation among sites (Tolonen et al., 2001; Johnson
& Goedkoop, 2002). To avoid spatial bias in the study
design, sites were distributed equally around the lakes
in longitudinal and latitudinal directions, and the shortest
distance between crayfish and non-crayfish sites
separated by large open water areas was 4 km (Fig. 1).
All study sites were trapped for crayfish at the end of
July (2008 in P€aij€anne, 2009 in Saimaa) to estimate the
density of individuals >60 mm in total length (the traps
are size-selective) and to confirm the absence of crayfish
from control sites. At stony sites, 25 cylindrical traps
(mesh size 15 mm) baited with fresh fish flesh (Rutilus
rutilus) were set during the evening at 5-m intervals
along transects parallel to the shore line at 1–3 m depth
and were collected the following morning. At vegetated
sites, 13–15 traps were placed close to the outer edge of
the dense macrophyte stands (depth 2–2.5 m). Fewer
traps were used at vegetated sites due to smaller patch
size compared with stony sites. Mean catch per unit
effort (CPUE) was used as an estimate of crayfish population
density (Table 1). Additionally, a scuba diver confirmed
visually the absence of crayfish at control sites
during invertebrate sampling.
Macroinvertebrates were sampled using an ejector
pump system powered by a high-pressure water pump
operated on a boat (Tolonen et al., 2001). At stony sites, a
scuba diver cleaned a framed area of substratum
(0.25 m2) with a brush, simultaneously sucking up the
loosened material (containing epi- and infauna) through
the ejector inlet hose (diameter 80 mm). The material was
led thorough the ejector outlet hose to a sieve with mesh
size of 0.5 mm. At the vegetated sites, the area sampled
(0.24 m2) was delimited by a heavy metal frame with a
2.5-m-long net (mesh size 0.5 mm) (Tolonen et al., 2001).
The net, long enough to reach the surface, was laid from a
boat to enclose all Phragmites stems from bottom to surface.
Stems inside the net were first agitated vigorously to
detach invertebrates, and then, all loose material was
sucked from surface to bottom using a metal funnel
attached to a thick plastic pipe connected to the ejector
pump system. At each site, from both habitats, three random
replicate samples were taken from each depth of 0.5,
1 and 2 m. In addition, five replicate samples from sublittoral
soft bottom habitats were taken with an Ekman-grab
(0.026 m2) at approximately 2 m distance from the outer
edge of the stony substratum (depth 3.6–8.5 m) at stony
sites. The invertebrates were preserved in 70% ethanol
immediately after sampling. In the laboratory, invertebrates
were sorted from the samples, identified as far as
possible (usually species or genus, except Chironomidae
and Oligochaeta) and counted.
The slope of the shore was determined by measuring
the horizontal distance from the shore line to 0.5, 1.0, 2.0
and 3.0 m depth using a laser distance measurer and an
echo sounder. Slope was calculated as the angle between
the bed and water surface. A mean calculated over these
four depths was used as the shore slope for each site.
The wind-induced disturbance (relative exposure) at
each shore was calculated from wind and fetch measurements
according to Brodersen (1995). Relative exposure
combines the weighted wind fetch, the mean wind
velocity, wind direction and sampling depth into a single
index. Mean wind values for the ice-free season
(May–November) 2006–2008 from the nearest observation
stations of the Finnish Meteorological Institute were
used for the calculations.
At stony sites, substratum particle size at 0.5, 1 and
2 m depth was estimated from three replicate plots
enclosed with a metallic frame (0.25 m2) using a modified
Wentworth scale (Allan, 1995). The percentage cover
of each size category was estimated visually, and a per-
centage-weighted average of the midpoints of the category
ranges was calculated for each replicate plot and
then averaged for the depth.
Periphyton samples were taken at stony sites from
three depth zones (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 m) at each site. From
each depth, one pooled sample (total area of 48.1 cm2)
was taken consisting of five random subsamples collected
from flat stone surfaces using a brush sampler
(Meril€ainen, Kokko & J€arvinen, 1987). Each sample was
filtered onto a glass fibre filter and frozen. In the laboratory,
chlorophyll-a was analysed according to Finnish
standard SFS 5772. The amount of chlorophyll-a
(mg m"2) was used to represent abundance of periphyton
at each site and depth.
Statistical analyses
The differences in mean density of all taxa, the density
of snails and taxon richness between crayfish and
non-crayfish sites were tested separately for stony and
vegetated habitats with a linear mixed effects split-plot
model using the lme-function in R (Bates, Maechler &
Dai, 2008). Crayfish status, depth and lake were used as
fixed factors and site as a random factor to block
measured variables within each site in the model. When
analysis indicated significant interaction effect, a pairwise
post hoc analysis of interactions was conducted for
cell means obtained from the initial model in the package
phia in R. We analysed the effect of crayfish on the
sublittoral benthos adjacent to the stony sites using
two-factor ANOVA (crayfish status and lake as the fixed
factors) separately because of different sampling methods
and distinct species composition and density as
compared to the stony and vegetated sites. Density and
taxon richness of snails were not analysed separately for
the sublittoral habitat, due to the large number of zero
values in the samples. The effect of crayfish on the
amount of periphyton (chlorophyll-a) was tested with
data collected from three depths at each stony site, using
a similar split-plot design as described above for macroinvertebrate
density and taxon richness. In all cases,
only significant interactions were reported. Normality
and homogeneity of the variables tested were checked
visually by boxplots and residual plots, and data were
square root-transformed if needed. All analyses of variance
and mixed effect models were performed with R
(R Development Core Team, 2009).
Patterns in the macroinvertebrate and snail assemblage
compositions between crayfish and non-crayfish
sites were examined and illustrated separately for stony
and vegetated habitats by non-metric multidimensional
scaling (NMS) ordination, using Bray–Curtis distance
measure and transformed [log(x + 1)] macroinvertebrate
taxa mean density (m2) data for the three depths at each
site. Ekman-grab samples were excluded from the analysis
because this method clearly collected fever taxa and
individuals than other methods. Separate solutions (50
runs with real data and randomised data with random
starting point) were run for both lakes and habitats. To
reveal the impact of environmental factors on community
composition, solution axes were correlated with a
secondary matrix containing environmental variables
which are known to shape macroinvertebrate assemblages
in large lakes (Table 1). To confirm visual interpretation
of NMS ordination results, differences in
community composition between crayfish and non-crayfish
sites were tested with Multi-Response Permutation
Procedures (MRPP). Community composition analysis
was continued with the indicator species analysis (ISA)
(Dufr^ene & Legendre, 1997) to recognise taxa that were
characteristic of either crayfish or non-crayfish sites. ISA
was conducted separately for the two lakes and habitats
using transformed [log(x + 1)] density data. The significance
of indicator values was tested with 4999 permutations
in the Monte Carlo tests. NMS, MRPP and ISA
were performed with PC-ORD 5.0. software (MjM
Software, Gleneden Beach, OR, U.S.A.).


xresults
At stony littoral sites, the mean density of all macroinvertebrates
did not differ between crayfish and non-crayfish
sites (F = 0.01, d.f. = 1, P = 0.99) or between depth zones
(F = 1.76, d.f. = 2, P = 0.19) (Fig. 2a). However, macroinvertebrates
were more numerous at stony sites in Saimaa
than in P€aij€anne (F = 13.51, d.f. = 1, P < 0.01) (Fig. 2a).
Similarly, at vegetated sites, the mean density did not
differ between crayfish and non-crayfish sites (Fig. 2b)
(F = 0.74, d.f. = 1, P = 0.41), or between depths (F = 1.96,
d.f. = 2, P = 0.16), and mean density was again higher in
Saimaa (F = 6.74, d.f. = 1, P = 0.02).
The overall mean snail density was higher on stony
shores without crayfish (F = 4.95, d.f. = 1, P = 0.04) and
again higher in Saimaa (F = 14.30, d.f. = 2, P < 0.01)
(Fig. 2c). Depth did not show a clear main effect on snail
density (F = 2.62, d.f. = 2, P = 0.09), but there was a significant
interaction between depth and lake (F = 3.71,
d.f. = 2, P = 0.04), suggesting that depth had a different
effect on snail density in the two lakes. Pairwise post hoc
comparisons (all P-values <0.01) showed that mean snail
density was significantly higher in Saimaa in all depths
than in P€aij€anne. Snail density at vegetated sites did not
differ overall between crayfish and non-crayfish sites
(F = 0.37, d.f. = 1, P = 0.55) or depths (F = 1.45, d.f. = 2,
P = 0.25), but was higher in Saimaa (F = 6.74, d.f. = 1,
P = 0.02) (Fig. 2d).
At stony sites, overall mean taxon richness was
higher at sites without crayfish (F = 7.55, d.f. = 1,
P = 0.01) (Fig. 3a), but a significant interaction between
crayfish status and depth (F = 5.53, d.f. = 2, P < 0.01)
suggested that the effect of crayfish on taxon richness
was related to depth. Pairwise comparisons showed
that taxon richness was significantly lower at crayfish
sites at 2 m depth (P < 0.01) and nearly so at 0.5 m
(P = 0.06). Overall taxon richness was higher in Saimaa
than in P€aij€anne (F = 9.39, d.f. = 1, P < 0.01), and there
was an interaction between lake and depth (F = 7.44,
d.f. = 2, P < 0.01). Pairwise analysis showed that taxon
richness in Saimaa was higher at 0.5 m (P < 0.01) and
1 m (P < 0.01) depths than in P€aij€anne. At 2 m, taxon
richness was similar in both lakes (P = 0.37). At vegetated
sites, the mean number of taxa did not differ
with the presence or absence of crayfish (F = 0.03,
d.f. = 1, P = 0.86) or among depths (F = 0.18, d.f. = 2,
P = 0.83) (Fig. 3b). However, there were more taxa at
vegetated sites in Saimaa (F = 9.73, d.f. = 1, P < 0.01)
than in P€aij€anne.
Taxon richness of snails showed a similar pattern, with
stony sites without crayfish having more taxa overall than
sites with crayfish (F = 7.29, d.f. = 1, P = 0.02) (Fig. 3c).
The model showed no significant main effect of depth
(F = 2.10, d.f. = 2, P = 0.13) or lake on taxon richness
(F = 0.85, d.f. = 1, P = 0.37), although interactions
between crayfish status and depth (F = 9.98, d.f. = 2,
P < 0.01), and between depth and lake (F = 7.39, d.f. = 2,
P < 0.01), were significant. When comparing crayfish and
non-crayfish sites, snail taxon richness was significantly
lower only at 2 m depth (P < 0.01). Pairwise analysis also
showed that taxon richness was similar between all
depths when compared between lakes (all P > 0.27),
although in Saimaa, snail taxon richness was lower at 2 m
depth than at 0.5 or 1 m. At vegetated sites, snail taxon
richness was similar between non-crayfish and crayfish
sites (F = 0.71, d.f. = 1, P = 0.41) as well as between
depths (F = 1.54, d.f. = 2, P = 0.23) and lakes (F = 1.97,
d.f. = 2, P = 0.18) (Fig. 3d).
Mean invertebrate density in the sublittoral zone was
similar between non-crayfish and crayfish sites (F = 0.71,
d.f. = 1, P = 0.41) (Fig. 2a), but, in contrast to stony and
vegetated habitats, density was higher in P€aij€anne
(F = 7.19, d.f. = 1, P = 0.02). Taxon richness in the sublittoral
was similar (F = 0.02, d.f. = 1, P = 0.88) between
non-crayfish (mean: P€aij€anne 8.0; Saimaa 6.4) and crayfish
sites (mean: P€aij€anne 8.0; Saimaa 7.2) as well as
between lakes (F = 1.13, d.f. = 1, P = 0.30).
At stony sites, three-dimensional solutions (P€aij€anne:
final stress = 11.5; Saimaa: final stress = 11.2) in the
NMS ordination analysis best described the variation
in macroinvertebrate community composition in both
lakes. Sites were clustered according to crayfish status
across axes 2 and 3 in P€aij€anne and axes 1 and 3 in
Saimaa (Fig 4a,b). From the measured environmental
factors (Table 1), relative exposure showed the strongest
correlation with axis 2 in P€aij€anne (r = 0.56) and
with axis 3 scores (r = 0.54) in Saimaa (Fig. 4a,b).
Multi-response Permutation Procedures (MRPP) confirmed
compositional differences between stony crayfish
and non-crayfish sites in both lakes (P€aij€anne
A = 0.037, P = 0.0008; Saimaa: A = 0.056, P = 0.00001).
In contrast, the vegetated sites were not clustered
according to crayfish status in the NMS ordinations
(P€aij€anne final stress = 14.3; Saimaa: final stress = 11.01;
Fig. 4c,d). Nor did MRPP results suggest any significant
differences in community composition between
crayfish and non-crayfish sites (P€aij€anne: A = 0.007,
P = 0.12; Saimaa: A = 0.013, P = 0.07). In both lakes,
shore slope (P€aij€anne r = 0.71, Saimaa r = "0.45) and
relative exposure (P€aij€anne r = 0.54; Saimaa r = "0.59)
correlated with NMS-solution axes (Fig. 4c,d).
In both lakes, snail assemblages at stony sites clustered
clearly according to crayfish status in the NMS
solutions (P€aij€anne, three-dimensional solution, final
stress = 10.2; Saimaa: two-dimensional solution, final
stress = 13.5) (Fig 5a,b), and MRPP results confirmed a
significant difference between crayfish and non-crayfish
sites (P€aij€anne: A = 0.07, P = 0.0007; Saimaa: A = 0.09,
P < 0.0001). At vegetated sites, two-dimensional solutions
described snail community composition in both
lakes (Final stress, P€aij€anne = 20.95, Saimaa = 22.0), and
no evident aggregation according to crayfish status was
noticeable (Fig. 5c,d), as also suggested by the MRPP
results (P€aij€anne: A = 0.019, P = 0.056; Saimaa: A =
0.009, P = 0.18). In Saimaa, relative exposure (r = "0.54)
correlated with NMS-solution axes.
Indicator species analysis revealed several significant
indicator taxa for stony sites without crayfish in both
lakes (Table 2). Characteristic taxa of such sites
included snails (Gastropoda), aquatic beetles (Coleoptera)
and caddisflies (Trichoptera). In Saimaa, three
leeches (Hirudinea) also had high indicator values. Typical
taxa at stony sites with crayfish were nectonic bugs
(Micronectinae sp.) in Saimaa, and swimming mayflies
from the family Leptophlebiidae and a net spinning
caddisfly Polycentropus flavomaculatus in P€aij€anne. Overall,
analysis revealed fewer taxa with significant indicator
value for vegetated sites (Table 2). At crayfish sites
in Saimaa, six taxa had significant indicator value
(Table 2), including two mayflies (Caenis horaria, Cloeon
simile) and aquatic bugs (Micronectinae sp.). Only snails
(Gyraulus sp.) were indicator taxa of non-crayfish sites
in Saimaa, while, in P€aij€anne, Nematoda had significant
indicator value. As at crayfish stony sites, Polycentropus
flavomaculatus had significant indicator value at vegetated
sites in P€aij€anne.
The amount of periphyton at stony sites was similar
with and without crayfish (F = 0.38, d.f. = 1, P = 0.54)
(Table 1) and did not vary with depth (F = 2.04, d.f. = 1,
P = 0.16). However, in Saimaa, the mean biomass was
clearly higher than in P€aij€anne (F = 10.86, d.f. = 1,
P < 0.01) (Table 1).

xdiscussion
A number of studies have clearly demonstrated detrimental
effects of several non-native crayfish species on
native biota (Nystr€om, 1999; Lodge et al., 2000; Gherardi
et al., 2011). Nevertheless, most studies of their effects
on macroinvertebrates in lakes have been small-scale
experiments, using mesocosms or other manipulations
(see review in McCarthy et al., 2006), in which experi-
mental artefacts are particularly likely. Hence, direct
extrapolation of small-scale studies to nature, with
greater spatial scale and more complex environmental
settings, could be misleading (Lodge et al., 1998). Here,
we combined examination of different habitats and the
influence of environmental factors to achieve a more
realistic picture of effects of non-native crayfish in lakes.
Our finding that macroinvertebrate taxon richness,
and snail density and taxon richness were lower at stony
sites with crayfish was expected on the basis of previous
works. Overall taxon richness at stony sites was, on
average, 10 taxa (16%) lower at sites with crayfish and
was linked to the loss of snail taxa. Several experimental
studies have shown that crayfish decrease the density of
snails very effectively (Nystr€om et al., 1999; McCarthy
et al., 2006; Gherardi & Acquistapace, 2007). Wilson et al.
(2004) showed with long-term data that snail densities
decreased drastically in a small lake following the
appearance of an invasive crayfish (Orconectes rusticus).
Nilsson et al. (2012) also found a clear negative relationship
between invasive crayfish (O. rusticus) abundance
and macroinvertebrate density and species richness in a
survey of 10 lakes. Thus, our result that overall invertebrate
density was not affected by crayfish at stony sites
refuted our hypothesis and conflicted with previous
findings. Nevertheless, community composition analysis
(NMS & MRPP) did show consistent differences between
crayfish and non-crayfish sites in both our study lakes,
indicating an effect of crayfish on assemblage structure
in stony littoral areas.
However, our results indicate that effects of crayfish
on all taxa and on snail taxon richness were related to
depth, being most evident at 2 m. The selected stony
sites were open shores and exposed to heavy wave
action during the ice-free season (May–November), and
this factor is known to affect the structure of
macroinvertebrate assemblages (Tolonen et al., 2001).
Crayfish may also avoid the upper littoral due to harsh
conditions (Abrahamsson & Goldman, 1970), resulting
in reduced predation pressure there.
Our finding that macroinvertebrate density, taxon
richness and species composition at vegetated sites were
similar with and without crayfish suggests that signal
crayfish do not strongly affect macroinvertebrate assemblages,
or even snails, on the shores of large boreal lakes
dominated by Phragmites. Previous studies of signal
crayfish invasions have shown a strict habitat preference
for stony sites (Westman et al., 2002; Nystr€om et al.,
2006). The fairly high crayfish density at vegetated sites
(Table 1) indicates that crayfish do inhabit vegetated
areas in these lakes. However, crayfish abundance at
vegetated areas was on average less than half (45%) of
that at stony sites, suggesting lesser crayfish predation
at vegetated areas. Dense macrophytes may also physically
inhibit crayfish movements (Hessen, Skurdal &
Braathen, 2004), which could decrease crayfish predation
efficiency. The complex habitats created by dense
Phragmites stems also provides habitat in the vertical
dimension and thereby potential refugia for prey. For
instance, snails are the most vulnerable group for crayfish
predation, yet show anti-predator behaviour and
could avoid predators by moving up to Phragmites stems
(Nystr€om & Perez, 1998; Turner et al., 2000).
Signal crayfish can move considerable distances of
10–100 s of metres per day (Bubb et al., 2004) and also
can forage in deeper water (Ruokonen et al., 2012b).
Therefore, their effects could also be expected in deeper
sublittoral areas, close to the densely populated stony
shallows. However, our finding that mean invertebrate
density and taxon richness were not different in
sublittoral area adjacent to stony sites with and without
crayfish suggests that the signal crayfish does not affect
macroinvertebrates in deep water. Macroinvertebrate
density was low in the sublittoral and assemblages were
dominated by small-bodied taxa such as Oligochaeta
and Chironomidae, which live mainly within the substratum
(as ‘in fauna’). Therefore, their vulnerability to
crayfish predation and value as prey could be low, as
Nystr€om et al. (1999) suggested. However, because we
did not identify these dominant sublittoral groups to
species, we cannot draw conclusions about possible
crayfish effects on taxon richness or species composition.
Nystr€om et al. (1999) concluded that any effect of crayfish
could be taxon specific and depend, for example, on
the activity of prey. Direct predation is supposed to be
among the most important mechanisms for the effects of
crayfish on the benthos (McCarthy et al., 2006). We also
suggest that predation was one of the most likely reasons
for the differences detected between stony sites with and
without crayfish. Snails were clearly affected in terms of
overall density and taxon richness. Furthermore, the
snail assemblages at crayfish sites were dominated by
hard shelled spherical species (e.g. P. planorbis, Valvata
spp., A. crista) which are probably less vulnerable to
crayfish predation (Alexander & Covich, 1991; but see
Kreps, Baldridge & Lodge, 2012). Our finding that indicators
of crayfish presence included taxa which are active
swimmers (mayflies, aquatic bugs; Jansson, 1996; Merrit
& Cummins, 1996) supports our view about the importance
of direct predation. Our previous finding that
signal crayfish at stony shores in these lakes predominantly
feed on benthic invertebrates (Ruokonen et al.,
2012a,b) also supports a direct feeding effect.
In addition to direct predatory effects on the invertebrate
benthos, invasive crayfish have several potential
indirect effects, which could offer alternative explanations
for our results. Crayfish could change the relationships
and behaviour of native predators and prey (Nystr€om
et al., 2001). At stony shores, several predatory species
(the leeches Glossiphonia complanata, Helobdella stagnalis
and Erpobdella octoculata L., the stonefly Diura bicaudata
and the dragonfly Somatochlora metallica) were indicators
of crayfish absence. For example, leeches (Br€onmark,
1992) and dragonflies (Turner & Chislock, 2007) prey on
snails, so decreased prey availability could decrease their
performance or change their spatial distribution. The riffle
beetles Normandia nitens and Oulinmnius tuberculatus were
indicators of a lack of crayfish at stony sites in both lakes,
indicating that they might be excluded by crayfish.
Detailed knowledge of the ecology and behaviour of riffle
beetles is still lacking (Elliot, 2008), although they have
been noted to be very sensitive to various disturbances in
the environment (Aroviita & H€am€al€ainen, 2008; Elliot,
2008), apparently including the introduction of a crayfish
to a previously naive system.
Several experimental studies have reported that the
reduction of snail grazers by crayfish has resulted in a
clear increase in periphyton biomass via a trophic cascade
(Weber & Lodge, 1990; Lodge et al., 1994; Nystr€om
et al., 1999, 2001). We found a similar periphyton biomass
at stony sites with and without crayfish in both
study lakes and at all depths, regardless of differences
in snail density. This could have several explanations.
Firstly, perhaps grazing by snails is unimportant in
these large boreal lakes. Secondly, other grazers, such as
the mobile mayflies, might benefit from the reduction in
snails and replace them. However, our data do not show
any clear evidence for this ‘grazer replacement’
hypothesis. Thirdly, crayfish are omnivorous and could
simply feed directly on periphyton (Nystr€om & Strand,
1996; Gherardi & Lazzara, 2006), thereby preventing a
cascading effect. In fact, we observed high variation in
periphyton biomass among sites, especially in Saimaa
(Table 1), which could obscure detection of any simple
interaction between crayfish and periphyton. Nevertheless,
since we measured only periphyton biomass, we
cannot exclude the possibility that algal species
composition was influenced by signal crayfish, for example
by direct grazing, as has been found for other crayfish
species (Dorn & Wojdak, 2004; Gherardi & Lazzara,
2006).
The factors structuring the littoral macroinvertebrate
benthos form a complex network of abiotic and biotic
interactions (Tolonen et al., 2001; Johnson & Goedkoop,
2002; Holomuzki, Feminella & Power, 2010), which
might mask or be confounded with the effect of crayfish.
The correlation between macroinvertebrate species composition
and slope and relative exposure of the shore
indicated that those environmental factors are influential
in both stony and vegetated habitats. However, the
directions of these environmental correlations did not
coincide with the crayfish status and associated compositional
difference (Fig 4a,b), suggesting that the apparent
effects of crayfish cannot be explained by differences
in abiotic habitat features between sites with and without
crayfish. Predation by fish is one important factor
shaping macroinvertebrate assemblages (e.g. Diehl,
1992). However, the species composition and density of
benthic fish were similar across sites with and without
crayfish (Ruokonen et al., 2012a,b), and hence, we infer
that the effects of fish on macroinvertebrates were probably
similar among our study sites.
The density (CPUE) of larger (<60 mm total length) signal
crayfish (Table 1) at stony sites was relatively high,
compared with records from other Finnish lakes, and
reflect the present general status of crayfish in large Finnish
lakes (Erkamo et al., 2010). Although the abundances
observed were within the range found for the signal crayfish
in other Scandinavian lakes (e.g. Nystr€om et al., 2006),
those were clearly lower than typically reported for other
non-native crayfish elsewhere. For example, McCarthy
et al. (2006) and Nilsson et al. (2012) reported 10-fold
greater abundances for rusty crayfish at invaded lakes in
North American temperate lakes. This lower abundance
of crayfish in our boreal lakes is likely to be one reason
why effects on invertebrates density and periphyton
biomass, as well as on benthic fish (Ruokonen et al.,
2012a,b), were less evident than reported previously.
Our results increase the evidence that invasive crayfish
can exert great harm on native biota across different
waterbodies and emphasise the importance of further
research to understand the responses in different habitats.
Even the relatively small effects on invertebrate
assemblages documented here might have significant
implications. For instance, the decreased abundance of
snails and some other invertebrates is reflected in the
fish parasite communities (Pulkkinen et al., 2013).
Several recent reviews have emphasised the challenges
and priorities for freshwater conservation to maintain
biodiversity and ecosystem processes (Dudgeon et al.,
2006; Strayer & Dudgeon, 2010). Regardless of welldocumented
negative effects of invasive crayfish on
native biota, their rapid spread continues (e.g. Holdich
et al., 2009). Management of non-native crayfish that are
already established is difficult or even impossible (Holdich
et al., 2009; Gherardi et al., 2011). Hence, the focus
should be placed on the prevention of further crayfish
invasions, in particular to waterbodies harbouring rare
or protected species.