xabstract


: Invasive alien plants can affect biomass production

and rates of biogeochemical cycling. Do the direction

and intensity of such effects depend upon the functional

traits of native and alien species and upon the properties

of the invaded habitat, with the same alien species having

differing impacts in different habitats? Lowlands of Switzerland. Fourteen grassland and wetland sites invaded by

Solidago gigantea and widely differing in biomass production

and soil P availability were surveyed. To determine

whether the impact of the species was related to site

fertility, we compared the invaded and native vegetation

in terms of biomass, species composition, plant traits and

soil properties. S. gigantea generally increased the above-ground

biomass production of the vegetation and soil C content,

while reducing nutrient concentrations in biomass and N

availability in the soil. However, it had no significant

effect on plant species richness, soil respiration, soil pH

and P availability. Leaves of S. gigantea had a greater C

content than those of native species; other leaf traits and

root phosphatase activity did not differ significantly. : Our results suggest that a conservative nutrient-use

strategy allows S. gigantea to invade a broad range

of habitats. The observed effects of invasion did not vary

according to biomass production of the invaded sites, but

some effects did depend on soil P availability, being more

pronounced at more P-rich sites. Thus, the full range of

invaded habitats should be considered in studying the

potential impact of plant invasions on ecosystem processes. xintroduction The displacement of native plant species by invasive

plants is a major concern for natureconservation

managers. To tackle this problem, the

mechanisms underlying the impact of invasive

plants on the invaded communities need to be understood

(Parker et al. 1999; Levine et al. 2003).

Apart from direct competitive exclusion, invasive

plants may reduce native species diversity indirectly

by changing soil processes so as to create a positive

feedback-loop that promotes the growth and spread

of the invader (Miki & Kondoh 2002; Ehrenfeld

2003). For example, invasive plants can influence

nutrient cycles by changing the timing of nutrient

uptake and nutrient release, by producing litter of

different quality, by introducing different nutrient

acquisition strategies (N2 fixation, mycorrhiza, deep

rooting), or by having increased or reduced nutrient-use

efficiency than the established plant

community (Evans et al. 2001; Mack et al. 2001;

Blank & Young 2002; Windham & Ehrenfeld 2003;

Chapuis-Lardy et al. 2006; Sala et al. 2007). Studies

investigating the impact of invasive plants on soil

processes have mainly pointed towards a stimulation

of nutrient cycling and increased nutrient

availability, although opposite effects have also

been observed for individual species (Ehrenfeld

2003).

The overall tendency of plant invasions to stimulate

nutrient cycling and to increase site fertility

reflects the typical traits of successful plant invaders.

Phenotypic plasticity, relative growth rate, specific

leaf area (SLA) and nutrient concentrations in plant

biomass and litter tend to be greater in invasive

plants than in co-occurring native plant species

(Grotkopp et al. 2002; Daehler 2003; Ehrenfeld

2003; Hamilton et al. 2005; Leishman et al. 2007).

However, not all invasive plants exhibit these

traits, and the impact on ecosystems of plants with contrasting functional traits may differ (Vila et al.

2006). For example, Yelenik et al. (2007) found that

two invasive legumes both increased N availability

through N2 fixation, but only the perennial woody

species caused a build-up of organic N, due to its

more refractory litter. Thus, studying the functional

traits of invasive plants helps to better understand

the changes in ecosystem processes associated with

their invasion (Eviner 2004; Gurvich et al. 2005;

Suding et al. 2008).

The impact of invasive plants may also depend

on the properties of the invaded ecosystem, with site

fertility being particularly important (Funk & Vitousek

2007). According to initial site fertility,

invasive plant species may increase or decrease nutrient

concentrations in the soil, as has just been

recently shown for highly invasive species in Belgium

(Dassonville et al. 2008). The ëëtypicalíí plant

traits associated with invasiveness (see above) generally

confer a competitive advantage upon a species

at nutrient-rich sites (Aerts 1999; Leishman et al.

2007), and nutrient enrichment has indeed been

found to promote plant invasions (Daehler 2003;

Lake & Leishman 2004). However, nutrient-poor

ecosystems may also be invaded, usually by species

that use resources more conservatively (Monaco

et al. 2005; Funk & Vitousek 2007) or are more

plastic than the native species (Richards et al. 2006;

Schumacher et al. 2009). Nutrient-limiting growth

conditions can lead to different or weaker effects of

invasive species on soil properties and processes

(Kueffer et al. 2008). We might, therefore, expect

plant species that invade both nutrient-poor and

nutrient-rich sites to have varying impacts, especially

if the relevant functional plant traits vary

according to site fertility.

An ideal species to test this hypothesis is the

perennial rhizomatous forb Solidago gigantea (Lauber

& Wagner 2007). This invasive alien occupies a

large variety of habitats, ranging from dry to wet

and from nutrient-rich to nutrient-poor, in Europe

(Voser-Huber 1983; Gu®sewell et al. 2005; Weber &

Jakobs 2005). For its impact on ecosystem properties,

studies in grasslands in Belgium revealed

greater above-ground production, P uptake and labile

P concentrations in invaded than uninvaded

sites (Vanderhoeven et al. 2005, 2006; Chapuis-Lardy

et al. 2006). These results pointed to an increased

P turnover in S. gigantea stands (Vanderhoeven et

al. 2006; Herr et al. 2007). Such an effect would be a

matter for concern, as it could potentially displace

native plant species adapted to low P availability

(Wassen et al. 2005) and promote further spread of

invasive plants. However, the sites studied were

ruderal grasslands with relatively high P concentrations

in plants and soil, and it remains uncertain

whether S. gigantea has undesirable effects in nutrient-poor

ecosystems, these being of particular

conservation interest.

In this study, we surveyed 14 sites naturally invaded

by S. gigantea and representing a wide range

of habitat types of differing fertility. Our aim was to

answer two main questions: (i) Does S. gigantea affect

ecosystem properties across a broad range of

habitats? (ii) Do invasion effects depend on site fertility

prior to invasion? 


xmethods

 S. gigantea was introduced from North America

as an ornamental plant in the 18th century. It started

to spread extensively in central Europe between

1850 and 1889 (Weber & Jakobs 2005) and is nowadays

widespread. It is a perennial forb (Asteraceae)

with annual stems of 50-200 cm height, which

emerge in May, flower in August-September, and

senesce in autumn. Its numerous small, wind-dispersed

seeds allow S. gigantea to colonize new sites,

but once established, it primarily spreads through its

below-ground creeping rhizomes and can form

dense, almost monospecific, stands (Weber & Jakobs

2005). S. gigantea occurs over a wide range of

soil conditions in Europe (Jakobs et al. 2004;

Schlaepfer 2008), whereas it typically grows on

moist soils in its native range (Abrahamson et al.

2005). In summer 2006, 14 sites with semi-natural vegetation

invaded by S. gigantea were selected in

northern and western Switzerland (46-471N, 6-91E),

ranging from 350 to 500 m a.s.l. Criteria for site selection

were that: (i) the native plant community

should be well established (no recently invaded sites)

and visually homogeneous, (ii) Solidago invasion

should not be associated with obvious heterogeneities

in soil or terrain, or with previous

disturbance, (iii) the survey should include a range

of habitats from dry or semi-dry, nutrient-poor

grasslands to highly productive wetlands and agricultural

old-fields (established several years ago and

with a dense vegetation cover), and (iv) no other

Solidago species or invasive alien plants should be

present. At all sites, S. gigantea stands formed distinct

patches of one to several metres diameter within the

native vegetation. In the following, we refer to areas

without S. gigantea as ëëuninvaded patchesíí, and to

their plant communities as ëënative vegetationíí.

Stands of S. gigantea are called ëëinvaded patchesíí

of ëëinvaded vegetationíí, although they also contained

native species. By analogy, the soil found

under the native or invaded vegetation is called

ëënative soilíí and ëëinvaded soilíí, respectively. Differences

between invaded and uninvaded patches or

their soils are referred to as ëëinvasion effectsíí

throughout this paper. ëëEffectíí is taken in a statistical

sense as a comparative approach cannot

unequivocally demonstrate causal effects. However,

our site selection criteria (see above) would maximize

the likelihood that significant differences

between invaded and uninvaded patches reflect true

invasion effects (Vanderhoeven et al. 2006).

The native vegetation at the 14 sites was dominated

by the following species (Lauber & Wagner

2007): Carex flacca (site 1: semi-dry grassland on a

river bank), Calamagrostis epigejos and Brachypodium

pinnatum (site 2: semi-dry grassland on a

railway verge), Bromus erectus and Hypericum perforatum

(site 3: semi-dry grassland on a slope),

Festuca arundinacea and Lotus corniculatus (site 4:

semi-dry grassland on a gravel roadside), Festuca

rubra and Elymus repens (site 5: grassland on an

earth bank), Phragmites australis (site 6: wetland in

a nature-conservation lakeside), Dipsacus fullonum

and Origanum vulgare (site 7: old-field on a formerly

agricultural field), Molinia litoralis (site 8: grassland

on a river slope), Molinia caerulea (site 9: wetland in

a nature-conservation lakeside), Carex acutiformis

and Lysimachia vulgaris (site 10: wetland in a restored

nature-conservation site), Urtica dioica and

Potentilla reptans (site 11: moist old-field on a formerly

agricultural field), Filipendula ulmaria and

Dryopteris filix-mas (site 12: wet forest skirt), P.

australis and Cirsium arvense (site 13: wetland in a

nature-conservation riverside), P. australis and

Phalaris arundinacea (site 14: wetland in a natureconservation

reed).

At each site, three plots of 40 cm40 cm (in total

0.5 m2

) were located in the native vegetation

(uninvaded patches) and three plots in stands of S.

gigantea (invaded patches) within an area of 50-

100 m2

. The small plot size was necessary in order to

sample only the centre of S. gigantea patches at all

sites. In July 2006, the height of the vegetation

was recorded in all plots, and the shoot number of

S. gigantea was counted in the invaded plots. The

species composition of each plot was recorded

(without abundance data) and used to establish two

pooled species lists for each site, one for the native

vegetation and one for the invaded vegetation (see

Appendix S1). Species numbers, as well as average

ecological indicator values for moisture (F) and nutrients

(N) (Ellenberg et al. 1997), were calculated

for the total area of 0.5 m2 in the native as well as in

the invaded vegetation of each site. S. gigantea was

excluded from these calculations so that they would

reveal how the native species composition differed

between invaded and uninvaded patches.

The above-ground biomass of the plots was

harvested, dried for 48 h at 751C, and weighed. Below-ground

biomass samples were collected at four

sites (wetlands) in summer 2006 from an area of

20 cm20 cm and a depth of 15 cm within the selected

plots. Roots and rhizomes were cleaned from

soil and these samples were also dried and weighed.

The dried plant material (above- and below-ground)

was ground to 1 mm prior to chemical analyses.

Kjeldahl N and P concentrations were determined in

the dried plant material by acid digestion, where

ground plant material was digested with concentrated

H2SO4 and a Kjeltab (3.5 g K2SO4/0.4 g

CuSO4; FOSS Analytical AB, Ho®gana®s, Sweden)

at 4201C for 1 hr. N and P concentrations of the digests

were analysed using a flow injection analyser

(FIASTAR 5000, FOSS Tecator AB). To determine differences or similarities in leaf

traits between the invader S. gigantea and dominant

native species, we sampled 10-20 leaves from S. gigantea

and from two or three dominant species of

the adjacent native vegetation at each site in July

2006. Leaves of native species were sampled in the

uninvaded patches. Samples were kept between wet

paper to saturate leaf tissue with water until they

were processed later in the same day. Leaf area was

measured using a leaf area meter (LI-3100, LiCor,

Lincoln, NB, USA), and the samples were then

weighed, dried at 751C for 24 h and weighed again.

The measurements were used to calculate the SLA

(leaf area divided by dry mass), tissue density (dry

mass divided by fresh mass), and leaf thickness

(fresh mass ñ approximately equal to leaf volume ñ

divided by leaf area). C and N concentrations of

the dried leaf material were measured using an elemental

analyser (CN-2000, Leco Corporation,

St. Joseph, MI, USA). Additionally, root phosphatase activity was determined

with root samples obtained from soil cores

(4 cm diameter, 10 cm depth) taken in the uninvaded

and invaded patches (n 5 5 cores). In the invaded

patches, only roots of S. gigantea were collected; in

the uninvaded patches, all roots were collected, but

no attempt was made to identify the species. Within

24 h after soil core sampling, cleaned roots (100 mg)

were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature in reaction

tubes with 5 ml p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP)

substrate solution (5 mM) buffered at pH 6 (Tabatabai

& Bremner 1969). The reaction was stopped by

adding 500 ml of the samples to 3 ml NaOH (2 N). The

absorbance of the solution was measured at 410 nm

using a photometer (Uvi Light XT2, Secomam, Ales

Cedex, France) and used to calculate the amount of

p-nitrophenol released from the substrate as a measure

of root phosphatase activity. Five soil cores (4 cm diameter, 15 cm depth)

were taken in the uninvaded and invaded patches in

July 2006, after the harvest of vegetation biomass.

They were kept at 41C until they could be processed.

Fresh soil samples were analysed for pH, availability

of N and P, and phosphatase activity within 48 h

after sampling. Soil pH was determined in distilled

water (Allen 1989). Ammonium and nitrate availability

were determined with 0.2 M potassium

chloride extractions, by shaking 20 g fresh soil in

100 ml KCl for 1 h (Verhoeven et al. 1996). Phosphate

availability (Olsen-P) was assessed with 0.5 M

sodium bicarbonate extractions, by shaking 10 g

fresh soil in 100 ml NaHCO3 (pH 8.5) for 1 h (Allen

1989). N and P concentrations in the soil extracts

were measured using the flow injection analyser

(FIASTAR 5000). Phosphatase activity in soil was

determined using modification of the pNPP method

of Tabatabai & Bremner (1969). Fresh soil (2 g) was

mixed with 5 ml pNPP substrate solution (200 mM)

and gently shaken for 1 h at room temperature (pH

was not manipulated). After the addition of 200 ml

NaOH (2 N) to the samples, the absorbances were

measured at 410 nm using the photometer (Uvi

Light XT2). Soil samples were dried at 1051C for

24 h to determine the dry weight percentage. They

were subsequently ground in a mortar to analyse

total C and N concentrations using the elemental

analyser (CN-2000).

In April 2007, soil respiration was measured at

six of the sites (four semi-dry grasslands and two

wetlands) in three invaded and three uninvaded

patches per site. A soil respiration chamber (991 cm3

volume) was used that could be fixed on PVC collars

inserted in the soil to create a closed soil-air system

(Wang et al. 2008) and a portable infrared gas analyser

(Li 6400, LiCor) was attached. To minimize the

effects of soil disturbance, collars were inserted into

the soil 24 h before the measurements began. In the

same plots, soil temperature and moisture at 5 cm

depth were measured using a contact thermometer

(testo 112, testo AG, Mo®nchaltorf, Switzerland) and

a TDR probe (HH2 Moisture Meter, Delta-T Devices

Ltd, Cambridge, UK).

Nutrient availability in soil was investigated in

situ in October 2007 using ion-exchange resin (IER)

bags (Qian & Schoenau 2002). Each IER bag consisted

of 2 g mixed-bed IER (Amberlite IRN 150,

H1 and OH form, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland),

which was filled in 5 cm5 cm bags made

of fine Nylon fabric (60 mM mesh width, Sefar Nitex

03- 60/35, Sefar AG, Thal, Switzerland). Before use,

the IER bags were shaken twice for 30 min with 1 M

KCl to saturate exchange sites with K1 and Cl

ions. Six IER bags were inserted 1-2 cm below the

soil surface in each of the two vegetation types (native

or invaded) within an area of 50-100 m2 at each

site. The IER bags were removed from the soil after

1 month, cleaned with deionized water and extracted

in 50 ml HCl (0.5 M) by shaking for 1 h. IER extracts

were analysed for ammonium and nitrate

concentrations using a flow injection analyser

(FIASTAR 5000). Phosphate concentrations were

determined in the IER extracts using the acid molybdate

blue method (Murphy & Riley 1962), and

absorbance was measured at 880 nm using the photometer

(Uvi Light XT2). To test whether ecosystem properties differ between

native and invaded vegetation (question 1),

we first carried out two-way analyses of variance

with the factors ëëinvasioníí (fixed) and ëësiteíí (random).

These analyses revealed significant invasion

effects (for leaf C, biomass, nutrients in biomass,

soil N availability) and invasionsite interactions

(for vegetation height, P concentration in biomass,

nutrient availabilities in soil, root phosphatase activity,

pH) confirming that invasion effects vary

among sites (results not shown).

To test whether these differences depend on site

fertility (question 2), we then performed analyses of

covariance with ëëinvasioníí as the fixed factor and

ëësite fertilityíí as the covariable. However, our survey

included several variables that could serve as a

measure of ëëfertilityíí (productivity, soil nutrient availability), and the examination of correlations

among these variables (using only data from uninvaded

patches) revealed that the 14 sites could not be

ranked along a single fertility gradient. Rather, there

were two independent gradients, i.e. two groups of

variables correlated with each other, but not with

variables of the other group. One group, hereafter

referred to as ëëproductivity gradientíí, included the

above-ground biomass of the native vegetation, soil

N content, soil N availability and the moisture indicator

value (Table 1). We represented this gradient

by vegetation biomass in the analyses of covariance.

The second group, referred to as ëëP availability gradientíí,

included P availability in the native soils, P

concentrations in plant biomass and the nutrient indicator

value (Table 1). We represented it by soil P

availability as measured by Olsen extractions. All

variables were thus analysed with linear mixed models

including the invasion effect (uninvaded versus

invaded patches) as the fixed factor, productivity and

P availability as covariables, and sites as the random

factor. Variables measured at only four sites (belowground

biomass and root mass ratio) were analysed

without covariables because of the small site number.

Functional leaf traits were compared between S.

gigantea and native plant species, with an additional

distinction being made between native grasses and

forbs to account for differences between these functional

groups. A two-way ANOVA was performed,

with species group (S. gigantea, native forbs, native

grasses) and site as factors.

All statistical analyses were performed with R

version 2.5.0 (R Development Core Team, R Foundation

for Statistical Computing, Vienna, AT).

xresults


Small-scale species richness in uninvaded patches

at the 14 investigated sites ranged from four to

16 species (within a total area of 0.5 m2

) and was not

significantly changed by the invasion of S. gigantea

(Table 2); differences ranged from  82 to 140% at

individual sites. Ellenberg moisture indicator values

of the vegetation ranged from rather dry (4.1) to wet

(8.6) and nutrient indicator values ranged from nutrient-poor

(3.0) to nutrient-rich (7.8) across sites;

invaded and native vegetation did not differ for

these two parameters.

Above-ground biomass ranged from 0.19 to

1.26 kg m 2 in the native patches and was significantly

increased (on average by 87%) by the

invasion of S. gigantea (Table 2, Fig. 1a). Vegetation

in the invaded plots was also taller (Table 2). Belowground

biomass (at four of the sites) did not differ

significantly between the invaded and the native vegetation,

so that below-ground parts represented a

smaller fraction of total biomass in the invaded vegetation

(Table 2).

N and P concentrations in the above-ground

biomass were lower in the invaded vegetation than

in the native vegetation (Fig. 1c, d, Table 2). The

reduction in P concentration was most pronounced

at sites with high P availability (Fig. 2d; IPav interaction

in Table 2). The P pool in the aboveground

biomass was 1.3 times larger in invaded than

in native vegetation (Table 2), but there was no difference

between the N pools.

Leaves of S. gigantea had a greater C concentration

than leaves of the dominant native

species (Fig. 3a). Other leaf traits (SLA, leaf thickness,

leaf tissue density, leaf N concentration or C:N

ratio) did not differ significantly between S. gigantea

and native species (Fig. 3). When functional groups

were distinguished, S. gigantea and native forbs had

lower leaf tissue densities than native grasses (Fig.

3d). The root phosphatase activity of S. gigantea

tended to be lower than that of the native vegetation,

but the difference was not significant (P 5 0.09,

Table 2). The soils at the various sites ranged from loam

to peat, and all soil properties also varied widely

among sites. However, only few variables appeared

to be influenced by S. gigantea. Total C concentrations,

which ranged from 25.7 to 123.3 g kg  1

, were

on average increased by 6% in invaded soils (Figs.

1b, 2b, Table 3). Total N concentrations ranged

from 1.2 to 10.3 g kg  1 and did not differ between

native and invaded plots (Table 3). For the soil C:N

ratio, differences depended on soil P availability

(significant interaction): the soil C:N ratio was

reduced under invaded vegetation at sites with low

P availability and increased at sites with high soil

P availability.

Inorganic N concentration (ammonium1nitrate)

was 16% lower in invaded plots than in native

ones (Figs. 1e, 2e, Table 3). Both nitrate and ammonium

concentrations were reduced similarly,

although the effect was only significant for nitrate

(Table 3). These differences depended on site productivity

and soil P availability, with greater

reductions in soil N and nitrate concentrations at

sites with low biomass production and intermediate

P availabilities (Table 3, Figs 1e, 2e). The phosphate

concentration (Olsen-P) varied widely among sites

(0.6-13.7 mg  P  kg  1 soil), but was not significantly

affected by S. gigantea invasion (Table 3, Figs 1f,

2f). Also, there was no interaction between P availability

in the native vegetation and the effect of

S. gigantea invasion on soil phosphate concentration

(Table 3).

Nutrient availability as assessed by IER burial

(14-103 mg  N  g  1 IER and 0.8-24.6 mg  P  g  1

IER) was not significantly affected by S. gigantea

invasion, nor did any differences depend on productivity

or soil P availability (Table 3). Soil pH, soil

phosphatase activity, soil respiration rate, moisture

and temperature also did not differ between uninvaded

and invaded patches (Table 3). xdiscussion
The 14 study sites varied widely in biomass

production and soil P availability, as well as in

disturbance history (old-fields, semi-natural grasslands,

natural wetlands) and present management

(part of the sites are mown). Despite this variation,

the effects of S. gigantea on many vegetation properties

and on some soil properties were qualitatively

consistent across sites, although the size of the effects

differed among sites. Thus, invasion at all or

most sites was associated with increases in aboveground

biomass, vegetation height, P pools and soil

C content, and decreases in nutrient concentrations

in biomass and in N availability in the soil. Most of

these effects were also reported in previous studies in

Belgium (Chapuis-Lardy et al. 2006; Vanderhoeven

et al. 2006), suggesting that S. gigantea has fairly

consistent effects on ecosystem properties across a

broad range of habitats. Greater biomass production is one of the effects

most frequently associated with plant invasions

worldwide (Ehrenfeld 2003), and the invasion of

S. gigantea conforms to this pattern. The ability of

invasive species to increase biomass production can

be due to: (i) faster inherent growth rate, (ii) the

exploitation of nutrient sources that are unavailable

to the native species (Yelenik et al. 2004; Dassonville et al. 2007), or (iii) a more efficient use of nutrients

for biomass production (Fiala et al. 2004; Funk &

Vitousek 2007). Our comparison of leaf traits did

not support the first mechanism for S. gigantea, as it

did not have a greater SLA or nutrient concentration

in leaves than the co-occurring dominant native species. A greater SLA is typically found in fastgrowing

plants that invade nutrient-rich sites

(Daehler 2003; Leishman et al. 2007). Accordingly,

S. gigantea did not grow consistently faster than a

subset of the native species in a common garden experiment

(D. Scharfy, unpubl. data). A different

nutrient acquisition strategy from the native species

is also rather unlikely for S. gigantea. We found a

lower biomass allocation to roots and a tendency to

lower root phosphatase activity and S. gigantea has

a similar rooting depth as native species in Belgian

stands (Herr et al. 2007). Thus, the high biomass

production of S. gigantea is probably largely due to

a more efficient use of acquired nutrients.

Biomass N and P concentrations of the invaded

vegetation were lower than those of the native vegetation

in our study, apparently due to the

production of nutrient-poor stems, which can make

up 70% of the above-ground biomass of S. gigantea

in late summer, as Herr et al. (2007) determined in

Belgian stands. Lower nutrient concentrations mean

that more biomass can be produced per unit of N or

P taken up. However, this alone does not explain the

greater biomass production of the invaded vegetation,

as it contained a larger absolute amount of P

than the native vegetation. This may have been due

to reduced pools of P in below-ground parts during

the growing season and/or to more efficient nutrient

conservation during the winter. Herr et al. (2007)

showed that S. gigantea outperformed native species

in nutrient resorption from senescing shoots and

nutrient accumulation in below-ground parts during

the autumn. In pot experiments, we also found that

nutrients stored in roots and rhizomes at the end of

the growing season were conserved throughout the

winter (S. Gu®sewell & C. del Fabbro, unpubl. data).

Nutrient accumulation in rhizomes during the winter

is an effective competitive strategy at both nutrient-poor and nutrient-rich sites (Grime 2001).

It may therefore explain why S. gigantea is able to

invade the vegetation and increase its above-ground

biomass across sites with widely varying fertility.

Despite the greater biomass production, native

plant species richness was not consistently reduced

by S. gigantea, contrary to the negative effects reported

from Belgian sites (Vanderhoeven et al.

2006). This contradiction could be due to differences

in scale (six 1-m2 plots were analysed in Belgium

compared with three 0.16-m2 plots in the present

study). However, it can also be resolved by considering

that the effect of S. gigantea on species

richness was related to its effect on biomass: thus,

when the effect of S. gigantea on above-ground biomass

was small, the native species number tended to

increase, whereas it decreased when the biomass effect

was large (more than 10.25 kg m 2

). Our

results are therefore consistent with those in the

Belgian study, in which S. gigantea increased the

above-ground biomass by more than 0.25 kg m 2

(Vanderhoeven et al. 2006). The absence of a clear

negative effect of S. gigantea on species richness may

also be due to its late phenology: shoots only start

growing in late April, leaving niches for the growth

of native species in early spring, especially when its

stem density is not very high. Differences in phenology

between native and invasive species might

explain why some invasive species do not reduce

native species diversity (Gu®sewell & Edwards 1999;

Vila & Gimeno 2007).

An increase in soil organic matter (C) content

under stands of invasive plants has been reported in

many previous studies (Scott et al. 2001; Caldwell

2006; Fickbohm & Zhu 2006; Heneghan et al. 2006;

Vila et al. 2006), and has been attributed to increased

biomass production and litter fall (Yelenik

et al. 2004) or to reduced litter decomposition rates

(Ogle et al. 2003). In the case of S. gigantea, both

mechanisms might have contributed to the increase

in soil C. Biomass production was increased, but the

leaves of S. gigantea also had a greater mean C

concentration than those of native species (12.6%),

suggesting that S. gigantea tissue probably decomposes

more slowly than tissue of native species. The

effect of S. gigantea on soil C was, however, very

small compared with effects reported for other species

(Yelenik et al. 2007), and no significant increase

in soil C was found under S. gigantea in Belgium

(Vanderhoeven et al. 2006).

N availability in soil is often increased under

invasive plants (Ehrenfeld 2003), but reduced N

availability has also been found, for example for

Hieracium pilosella in tussock grasslands of New

Zealand (Scott et al. 2001) and Bromus tectorum in

an arid grassland in the western USA (Evans et al.

2001). The latter effect was typically attributed to

the production of nutrient-poor litter, leading to

slower N mineralization (Evans et al. 2001; Drenovsky

& Batten 2007). Because the vegetation

invaded by S. gigantea had lower nutrient concentrations

in standing biomass (this study) and

litter (Herr et al. 2007), N immobilization in decomposing

plant litter with a high C:N ratio might

have caused the lower N availability in soil under

S. gigantea. By causing low N supply rates through reduced mineralization rates, plants with a conservative

N-use strategy can reinforce their superiority

over native species (Wedin & Tilman 1990;

Evans et al. 2001; Drenovsky & Batten 2007). It remains

to be investigated whether S. gigantea

benefited from reduced N mineralization. For the

likewise invasive congeneric S. canadensis, Rebele

(2000) did observe a greater competitive ability relative

to native species under low-nutrient conditions.

P availability in soil was not increased by S. gigantea

invasion in our study. In contrast, increased

P availability was reported for Belgian sites, where it

was attributed to a greater P turnover due to S. gigantea

taking up more P in its biomass and releasing

more P through litter mineralization (Chapuis-Lardy

et al. 2006). Because the invaded vegetation in

Belgium had greater P concentrations than at our

Swiss sites, it is possible that the Swiss litter with a

greater C:P ratio released P more slowly and therefore

did not increase soil P availability. Soil

acidification, as partly found to be associated with

increased soil P availability in Belgium, also did not

occur. Furthermore, acid soil phosphatase activity

and soil respiration did not differ between native

and invaded vegetation at our sites, whereas they

were increased under S. gigantea in Belgium (Chapuis-Lardy

et al. 2006). This further suggests that

the greater litter input by S. gigantea stimulated nutrient

release through microbial activity in Belgium,

but not in Switzerland. Whether different nutrient

concentrations in litter were really responsible

would be a topic for further study. There were two largely independent gradients

related to fertility across our sites: productivity and

P availability. The productivity gradient was not

clearly related to N availability, despite a strong

positive correlation with KCl-extracted N, as productivity

(i.e. above-ground biomass of the

vegetation) correlated negatively with IER-N and

did not correlate with N concentrations in biomass

(Table 1). Productivity was also unrelated to soil

moisture, as assessed by Ellenberg F indicator values.

We found that the effects of S. gigantea on

ecosystem properties did not depend on productivity

(except for the soil nitrate availability), but for

several variables the magnitude and/or direction of

the invasion effect was conditioned by P availability

in the soil.

The differences in P concentration in the aboveground

biomass between native and invaded vegetation

were clearly strongest at the P-rich sites,

which consisted of one grassland and the two old-

field sites. This relationship might be linked to the

native vegetation composition, as there was a strong

positive correlation between the Ellenberg N indicator

value and the soil P availability (R 5 0.81, cf.

Table 1). Species with high Ellenberg N values generally

have high P concentrations in biomass and a

ruderal or competitive-ruderal strategy (Gu®sewell

2004), which implies a rapid cycling of nutrients.

The more conservative nutrient-use strategy of

S. gigantea would then contrast most strongly with

properties of the native vegetation at sites with high

soil P availability. The same reasoning may hold for

the reduction in soil N availability, which was also

more pronounced at the P-rich sites. Furthermore,

the soil C:N ratio was generally reduced in the

invaded patches, but it was increased at the most

P-rich sites. The latter was due to increased soil C

content and slightly lower soil N content, consistent

with the proposed difference in nutrient-use strategy

between S. gigantea and native species at the P-rich

sites.

The measured functional leaf traits of S. gigantea

gave no clear explanation for the dependence of

invasion effects on soil P availability. For the N

concentration of vegetation biomass, the C and N

concentrations of leaves, or plant height (which is

related to the fraction of stem biomass), differences

between the native and the invaded vegetation were

unrelated to soil P availability. It is possible that

differences in below-ground traits such as root nutrient

concentrations and litter production were

more important (Herr et al. 2007). Studies of seasonal

changes in below-ground biomass and nutrient

pools at a larger number of sites may be needed to

better understand the observed invasion effects.

Our study was initially triggered by concern

about the increase in soil P availability under S. gigantea

reported from Belgium (Chapuis-Lardy et al.

2006). We wondered whether vegetation of high

conservation value would be threatened by this effect,

or whether it would be limited to rather fertile

sites. Contrary to expectation, we found that S. gigantea

had no consistent effect on soil P, regardless

of the productivity or P availability of the invaded

site. There were considerable differences in Olsen-P

or IER-P between invaded and uninvaded plots at

some of the sites, but these were either positive or

negative. Absolute differences were largest at the

most P-rich sites (Fig. 2f), but relative differences

were also large at some of the P-poor sites (50-100%

difference). A similar observation was actually made

by Vanderhoeven et al. (2006), who found available P to be increased following invasion of S. gigantea at

two of the five investigated sites and reduced at one

site. Interestingly, the increase in available P occurred

at the least P-rich sites and the decrease

occurred at the most P-rich site, so that P availability

varied less among the invaded patches than

among the uninvaded ones (Vanderhoeven et al.

2006). Dassonville et al. (2008) recently proposed

that such a negative relationship between initial nutrient

availability and invasion effect on nutrient

availability, leading to more homogeneous soil conditions,

is a general pattern. This was not confirmed

by our study, in which the effects of S. gigantea on

soil P showed no relationship to initial P availability.

The labile soil P fractions were larger in

Belgium than the Olsen availability in our study, but

soil P availabilities were determined with different

methods in Belgium and a comparison is therefore

difficult. Further examination of our data also revealed

no relationship between invasion effects and

soil moisture (Ellenberg F value) or soil pH. It is

possible that site management plays a role by influencing

organic matter inputs to the soil (cf. ChapuisLardy

et al. 2006; Herr et al. 2007). Further research

to explain the diverging effects of S. gigantea on soil

P availability should therefore include long-term

experiments manipulating both initial soil fertility

and management. Three main conclusions can be drawn from this

study. First, our results show that S. gigantea has

the ability to modify ecosystem properties across a

wide range of vegetation types, including regularly

managed semi-natural vegetation. Our results also

basically confirm the previous suggestion that the

greater productivity and nutrient-use efficiency of

S. gigantea compared with native species are decisive

for its effect on ecosystem processes (as

indicated by the comparison of native and invaded

patches), whereas differing leaf traits typical of fastgrowing

invaders, such as greater SLA and nutrient

concentrations, were not involved.

Second, the effects of S. gigantea on biomass

production and soil nutrients were less dramatic

than those described from Belgium. In particular,

there was no increase in P availability. However, our

results do not imply that invasion by S. gigantea is

unproblematic for nature conservation; rather, they

highlight the need to keep the biomass and litter

production of S. gigantea as low as possible through

regular management. Third, some effects of S. gigantea on soil properties

were related to P availability, but not to N

availability or biomass production. It is therefore

important to consider that there may be independent

gradients related to nutrient availability,

and that these may be of differing importance for

the invasion effects. Accordingly, a multi-site approach

is important in studying the effects of

invasive plants on ecosystems. Detailed investigations

of soil processes at a single site (Herr et al.

2007) or at a small number of carefully selected sites

(Chapuis-Lardy et al. 2006) are valuable for understanding

how an invasive plant affects site

conditions, whereas multi-site surveys are needed to

assess the generality of such effects.