xabstract


Widespread fish introductions have led to a worldwide decline in the number of fishless lakes and their

associated communities. Studies assessing effects of fish stocking on native communities in historically

fishless lakes have been limited to high-elevation headwater lakes stocked with non-native trout. Little

is known about the effect of fish stocking in historically fishless and hydrologically isolated lowland kettle

lakes. We compared the effects of introduced fish on macroinvertebrate communities in kettle lakes

stocked with centrarchids, salmonids, and cyprinids, and headwater lakes stocked with brook trout

(Salvelinus fontinalis) in Maine, USA. Fish had significant effects on macroinvertebrate community structure

in both lake types, with reduced species richness and abundances of taxa characteristic of fishless

lakes. The effects of introduced fish were more pronounced in headwater lakes despite a less diverse fish

assemblage than in kettle lakes. We attribute this to abundant submerged vegetation providing refuge

from fish predation and reduced stocking frequency in kettle lakes. We assessed effects of stocking duration

on macroinvertebrates in a subset of headwater lakes with known dates of trout introduction.

Species richness and abundance of most taxa declined within 3 years following trout introduction; however,

richness and abundance were least in lakes with long stocking histories (P40 years). Macroinvertebrates

previously identified as fishless bioindicators were absent from all stocked lakes, indicating

that trout rapidly eliminate these sensitive taxa. Conservation of this historically undervalued ecosystem

requires protecting remaining fishless lakes and recovering those that have been stocked. xintroduction Widespread fish introductions have led to a worldwide decline

in the number of fishless lake communities (Donald, 1987; Bahls,

1992; Pister, 2001; Schilling et al., 2008). This study assesses the

need for urgent management strategies ensuring their conservation

in eastern North America, a region where little is known about

fishless lake communities. Naturally fishless lakes represent a unique

freshwater ecosystem. Such lakes enhance regional aquatic

species diversity by providing unique freshwater habitat conditions

along a gradient of waterbody permanence and predator

presence, ranging from temporary vernal pools lacking large dragonfly

and fish predators to permanent lakes where fish are top predators

(Wellborn et al., 1996; Stoks and McPeek, 2003). The

potential conservation value of fishless lakes extends beyond the

boundaries of the waterbody; fishless lakes provide important prey

items for migrating and breeding waterfowl (Bouffard and Hanson,

1997), passerines (Epanchin, 2009) and reptiles (Matthews and

Knapp, 2002).

Historically, humans have undervalued the ecological importance

of naturally fishless lakes, viewing them primarily as potential

sport fish habitat or sites for rearing bait fish. Rarefaction of

this unique habitat type due to the introduction of predatory fish

has led to landscape-scale losses of native prey species, such as

zooplankton (Stoddard, 1987; Bradford et al., 1998; Knapp et al.,

2001), amphibians (Fisher and Shaffer, 1996; Bradford et al.,

1998; Knapp et al., 2001; Pilliod and Peterson, 2001; Denoel

et al., 2005; Orizaola and Brana, 2006) and macroinvertebrates

(Bradford et al., 1998; Carlisle and Hawkins, 1998; Knapp et al.,

2001). In addition to direct predatory effects, introduced fish disrupt

in lake ecosystem processes (e.g., nutrient cycling and primary

productivity; Schindler et al., 2001) and sever trophic connections

between aquatic and terrestrial food webs with cascading effects

on riparian plants (Knight et al., 2005) and vertebrates (Matthews

and Knapp, 2002; Finlay and Vredenburg, 2007; Knapp et al.,

2007).


 Studies documenting the detrimental effects of fish stocking in

historically fishless lakes have focused on high-elevation headwater

lakes stocked with non-native trout, primarily in western North

America where fishless lakes historically were common (Donald,

1987; Bahls, 1992). This research is part of a larger body of work that

questions traditional fish management practices (Stanley, 1995; Rahel,

1997, 2000). Recent research, also in western North America,

demonstrates the potential for native headwater lake fauna to recover

following fish removal (Donald et al., 2001; Hoffman et al.,

2004; Knapp et al., 2005, 2007). Recognizing the ecological value

of fishless lakes and their potential for recovery has spurred state

and federal agencies to take a more holistic management approach.

Stocking has been halted in many high-elevation fishless lakes in national

parks and wilderness areas in western North America, and

some lakes are being restored to their natural fishless condition

(Milliron, 1999; Yosemite National Park, 2006; Bunn et al., 2007).

There have been no similar attempts to evaluate or mitigate the

effects of stocking historically fishless lakes in eastern North America,

a region where fish faunas are greatly altered due to widespread

introductions. While the predominant geographical trend

of fish introductions in North America has been westward invasions

of species native to the East, northeastern states contain

some of the most altered fish faunas in the USA due to the few species

considered desirable as game fish in northeastern waters

(Whittier and Kincaid, 1999; Rahel, 2000; Whittier, 2002). Fish

have been moved liberally within their native ranges among eastern

lakes, with many instances of translocations of ëënativeî fish to

waterbodies that have not previously contained these species

(Whittier and Kincaid, 1999; Whittier, 2002). Many naturally

fishless lakes in northeastern North America now contain fish

(Schilling et al., 2008). These include headwater lakes stocked primarily

with brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) and kettle lakes

(lakes formed in depressions left by glacial ice blocks) stocked with

a more diverse fish assemblage, including centrarchids, salmonids,

and cyprinids (Schilling et al., 2008). The ecological effects of stocking

have never been studied in fishless kettle lakes, a physiographic

lake type that occurs throughout formerly glaciated regions of

North America.

Despite differences in lake physical characteristics, fishless kettle

and headwater lakes in Maine, USA support similar macroinvertebrate

communities (Schilling et al., 2009). Fishless lake

macroinvertebrate communities in Maine are distinct from those

in similar lakes containing fish, with several unique species occurring

in fishless lakes (Schilling et al., 2009). It is estimated that

50% of the naturally fishless lakes in Maine have been stocked

with game or baitfish (Schilling, 2008). This study was developed

with the goal of informing conservation planning for this resource.

Our primary objective was to assess differences in macroinvertebrate

communities between currently and historically (but now

stocked) fishless kettle and headwater lakes in Maine to aid understanding

of how these unique communities are affected by introduced

fish. We hypothesized that effects of introduced fish on

macroinvertebrate communities would differ between the two

physiographic lake types, headwater and kettle, due to differences

in lake habitat structure, stocking regime, and fish species composition.

Our second objective was to assess whether the effect of

introduced fish on native macroinvertebrate communities in

repeatedly stocked lakes varies with the amount of time since

the original fish introduction. We hypothesized that the effect of

introduced fish on native macroinvertebrate communities would

be more pronounced in lakes with long histories of repeated stocking

than in recently stocked lakes. Understanding the reduction in

natural fishless lake macroinvertebrate biodiversity that occurs

with repeated stocking will help managers establish conservation

goals for these lakes. xmethods

 We identified two physiographic types of naturally fishless

lakes in two biophysical regions in Maine, USA: headwater lakes

in the central and western mountains and kettle lakes in the eastern

lowlands and foothills (Schilling et al., 2008). Prior to being

stocked, fish were naturally absent from these lakes since the last

glaciation (10,000 years BP) created natural physical barriers to

fish colonization. Fishless lakes in western Maine are high-elevation

headwater cirques isolated from fish colonization by steep

outlets impassable to fish. Fishless lakes in eastern Maine are kettle

lakes formed in depressions left by glacial ice blocks. Many kettles

have no surface water connections to other waterbodies and thus

lack routes for fish movement. Additionally, many kettles are bog

lakes with naturally low pH, which limits fish species richness

(Rahel, 1984).

We identified 16 currently fishless (eight headwater, eight

kettle) and 14 historically fishless but now stocked (eight headwater,

six kettle) lakes for study (Fig. 1) by consulting fish survey

records (Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife

(MDIFW), unpublished data) and a geographic information

systems (GIS) analysis identifying lakes inaccessible to fish

(Schilling et al., 2008). These represent approximately half of

the known fishless lakes in the state of Maine (Schilling et al.,

2008; MDIFW, unpublished data) and were selected primarily

based on their accessibility and availability of landowner permits

for overnight sampling. Historical fish survey records indicated

that five of the stocked headwater lakes were fishless prior to

state-authorized brook trout stocking (MDIFW, unpublished).

The remaining three stocked headwater lakes and all six stocked

kettle lakes were selected based on GIS analyses that demonstrated

that physical characteristics of these lakes were similar

to other known fishless lakes in the region (Schilling et al.,

2008). Historical fishless status of these lakes was verified with

paleolimnological analyses of Chaoborus remains in lake sediment

cores (DeGoosh, 2007). The original dates of fish introductions

in these lakes were unknown, but sediment cores indicated

fish absence 14ñ61 years before present (Davis et al., 1994;

DeGoosh, 2007).

Field surveys to verify fish absence (fishless lakes) and fish

species composition (stocked lakes) and describe habitat characteristics

were conducted during single site visits during the summers

of 2002ñ2005. We surveyed the lakes for fish with gillnets

and minnow traps following MDIFW fish survey protocols (Tim

Obrey, MDIFW, personal communication). One four-panel

(19 mm, 25 mm, 33 mm, 38 mm mesh) monofilament gillnet

(40 m  1.5 m) was bottom-set perpendicular to shore for two,

15 min sets and checked for fish between sets. If no fish were

caught after two sets, the net was deployed overnight and

checked the following morning. Three minnow traps baited with

dog biscuits were placed at equal distances around the lake

perimeter and checked for fish after 12 h. If no fish were captured

during this survey, we considered the lake to be fishless. We

qualitatively assessed habitat structure (visual assessment of the

approximate proportion of lake perimeter rimmed with littoral

vegetation and distance it extended from shore), measured maximum

lake depth with a depth finder, and collected one water

sample for closed cell pH analysis. Lake surface area and elevation

were estimated with GIS (Schilling et al., 2008). We assessed differences

in measured physical variables between fishless and

stocked lakes within each physiographic lake type, as well as between

stocked headwater lakes and stocked kettle lakes, with

Studentís t-tests (a = 0.1). Field surveys to describe macroinvertebrate fauna were conducted

during single site visits during the summers of 2002ñ

2005. Analysis of multi-year and within season samples indicated

one sample date per year was sufficient to accurately represent

the macroinvertebrate assemblages (Schilling et al., 2009). Macroinvertebrates

were sampled overnight with submerged light traps

(n = 10/lake) placed in the littoral zone and containing glow sticks

to attract free swimming invertebrates (Schilling et al., 2009). A

subset of lakes was sampled with littoral sweeps and light traps;

comparisons of these methods indicated that light trapping alone

adequately represented community structure (Schilling et al.,

2009). Our results reflect shallow pelagic and littoral habitats,

and do not represent benthic sediments. All samples were sieved

(1 mm mesh) and preserved (70% ethanol). Macroinvertebrates

were counted and identified in the laboratory with a dissecting

microscope. Depending on the life-stage and specimen condition,

Hemiptera and Ephemeroptera were identified to genus, and Coleoptera,

Odonata, Notonectidae, and Chaoborus spp. were identified

to species. We conducted separate statistical analyses for headwater and

kettle lakes, testing for differences in macroinvertebrate communities

between stocked and fishless lakes, and then compared the results

to assess whether the effect of introduced fish differed by

physiographic lake type. All abundance data were log10 (x + 1)

transformed prior to analysis, and all data were summed across

10 light traps per lake.

We tested for differences in macroinvertebrate assemblage

structure between fishless lakes and stocked lakes with multiresponse

permutation procedure (MRPP) and non-metric multidimensional

scaling (NMS; PC-ORD version 5.0, MjM Software,

Gleneden Beach, OR) performed on absolute abundances of common

genera (occurring in >10% of all study lakes). MRPP is a

non-parametric method that tests for differences in species composition

between two or more a priori defined groups (McCune

and Grace, 2002). We report MRPPís chance-corrected within

group agreement value (A), which describes the effect size or degree

of within group homogeneity compared to the random expectation

(i.e., A attains its maximum value of one when all items are

identical within groups), and test statistic T (and its associated

P-value), which describes separation between groups (i.e., the

more negative the stronger the separation). We ran MRPP on a rank

transformed distance matrix with the Sorensen distance measure

and the n/sum(n) weighting factor (where n is the number of items

in the group).

NMS is an ordination technique that uses rank order information

in a dissimilarity matrix and is well-suited for community

data, because it avoids the assumptions of normality and linearity

(McCune and Grace, 2002). We ran NMS in autopilot mode (ëëslow

and thoroughî setting and Sorensen distance measure), finding the

optimal dimensionality with 250 runs performed on real data followed

by 250 runs with randomized data, with each run stepping

down in dimensionality from six axes to one axis. The final ordination

was obtained with the optimal dimensionality and the best

starting configuration determined from previous runs. We performed

five ordinations, evaluated each for consistency of interpretation,

and chose the ordination with the least final stress value as

the optimum solution. Differences in NMS scores between fishless

lakes and stocked lakes were analyzed with Studentís t-tests

(a = 0.1) to test whether macroinvertebrate community structure

differed between the two lake types. To simplify the graphical display,

we plotted the average position in ordination space of fishless

and stocked lakes on the two axes that showed the strongest associations

with fish presence.

We compared total and taxon-specific abundances (Studentís

t-tests; a = 0.1) and the frequency of occurrence (Fisherís exact

tests; a = 0.1) of common macroinvertebrate taxa between fishless

and stocked lakes (SYSTAT Software, version 11, Richmond, CA).

We also compared richness of families identified to species and

genus richness for Corixidae (Students t-tests; a = 0.1).

To test whether the effect of introduced fish on native macroinvertebrate

communities was more pronounced in lakes with long

histories of repeated stocking than in recently stocked lakes, we

analyzed data from a subset of headwater study lakes: three randomly

selected fishless lakes and five lakes with documented dates

of original fish introduction (two stocked for 3 years prior (3 year

duration) and three stocked for 40 years prior (40 year duration)

to our macroinvertebrate collections). We compared macroinvertebrate

abundance (total and taxon-specific) and total species richness

in fishless, 3 year duration, and 40 year duration lakes with

one-way analysis of variance and Leveneís test for equality of variances.

Pairwise comparisons were made with Fisherís protected

LSD when variances were equal and GamesñHowell when variances

were not equal (a = 0.1). In each of our study lakes we assessed

frequency of occurrence of six taxa identified as

bioindicators of fish absence in naturally fishless lakes (Schilling

et al., 2009): Graphoderus liberus, Dineutus spp., Hesperocorixa

spp., Callicorixa spp., Chaoborus americanus, and Notonecta insulata.

These taxa demonstrate extremes of characteristics (e.g., largebodied,

conspicuous, diurnally active in the water column) that increase

invertebrate vulnerability to fish predation (Schilling et al.,

2009).

xresults Fishless and stocked lakes in both physiographic lake types supported

distinct macroinvertebrate communities. MRPP indicated that homogeneity within fishless and stocked lakes was greater than

the random expectation (Aheadwater = 0.156; Akettle = 0.255). The difference

between fishless and stocked lakes was significant for both

headwater and kettle lakes (Theadwater = 4.753, P < 0.001;

Tkettle = 6.042, P < 0.001). Assemblages among fishless lakes were

moresimilar thanamongstocked lakes, indicatedby smaller average

within group distances for fishless (lheadwater = 0.234;lkettle = 0.247)

than stocked lakes (lheadwater = 0.610; lkettle = 0.540).

In both the headwater and kettle lake datasets, NMS identified

three major gradients capturing most of the variability, with

87.2% (r2

headwateraxis 1 º 0:476, axis 2 = 0.235, axis 3 = 0.162) and

93.1% (r2

kettleaxis 1 º 0:115, axis 2 = 0.152, axis 3 = 0.663) of the total

variance in each lake type explained by these three axes. The final

stress values (stressheadwater = 8.560; stresskettle = 6.386) were

small for ecological community analyses (typical range = 10ñ20);

however, small stress values were expected, because stress is

dependent on sample size (McCune and Grace, 2002), and we sampled

a relatively small number of lakes. NMS plots of similarity in

community composition showed strong clustering of lakes by fish

presence or absence (Fig. 2A and B). NMS scores on axes 1

(t[8] = 3.296, P = 0.011) and 2 (t[14] = 2.621, P = 0.020) differed between

fishless and stocked headwater lakes (Fig. 2A). NMS scores

on all three axes differed between fishless and stocked kettle lakes

(axis 1: t[12] = 3.356, P = 0.006, axis 2: t[12] = 2.614, P = 0.023, axis 3:

t[12] = 3.085, P = 0.009; Fig. 2B). NMS scores were more variable

among stocked lakes than fishless lakes, consistent with MRPP results,

indicating greater variability in assemblage structure in

stocked lakes than fishless lakes. Effects of introduced fish were more pronounced on macroinvertebrate

communities in headwater lakes than in kettle lakes.

The total number of macroinvertebrates captured was 13.9 times

(ratio of the geometric means (Mg)) greater in fishless headwater

lakes (Mg = 407.79) than stocked headwater lakes (Mg = 29.36;

t[14] = 3.692, P = 0.002). Average total abundance did not differ

significantly between fishless (Mg = 385.36) and stocked kettle

lakes (Mg = 151.64, t[12] = 0.977, P = 0.348). Taxon specific differences

between the two lake types mirrored the differences in total

abundance in fishless and stocked lakes; more taxa differed in

abundance or percent occurrence between fishless and stocked

headwater lakes than fishless and stocked kettle lakes (Table 2).

Eight families (Fig. 3) and 15 genera and species (Table 2) were

more abundant in fishless headwater lakes than stocked headwater

lakes. Two families (Fig. 3) and 10 genera and species (Table 2) were

more abundant in fishless kettle lakes than stocked kettle lakes. No

taxa were more abundant in stocked than fishless headwater lakes,

whereas Cenocorixa spp. and C. punctipennis were more abundant

in stocked than fishless kettle lakes. Dytiscid beetles were strongly

associated with fish absence in both headwater and kettle lakes,

with G. liberus abundant in the majority of fishless lakes but absent

in stocked lakes. Dytiscus spp. were more abundant in fishless than

stocked headwater lakes, and Ilybius spp. were more abundant in

fishless than stocked kettle lakes. Gyrinid and haliplid beetles were

strongly associated with fishless headwater lakes, with Dineutus

spp. and Gyrinus spp. more abundant in fishless lakes. Notonectids

were strongly associated with fish absence in both headwater and

kettle lakes, with N. insulata abundant in the majority of fishless

lakes but absent in stocked lakes. Buenoa spp. were more abundant

and occurred more frequently in fishless than stocked kettle lakes.

Corixids were strongly associated with fish absence in headwater

lakes, with Callicorixa spp, Hesperocorixa spp., Neocorixa spp., and

Sigara spp. more abundant and occurring more frequently in fishless

lakes. Hesperocorixa spp. was the only corixid genus more abundant

in fishless than stocked kettle lakes. The chaoborid C. americanus was

strongly associated with fish absence in both headwater and kettle

lakes and was abundant in the majority of fishless lakes but absent

in stocked lakes. The odonates Aeshna eremita and Leucorrhinia

spp. were more abundant in fishless than stocked headwater lakes.

No odonates differed in abundance or percent occurrence between

stocked and fishless kettle lakes.

Average species richness of all identified species was more than

three times greater in fishless headwater lakes than stocked headwater

lakes (lfishless = 8.4, lstocked = 2.6; t[14] = 3.157, P = 0.007).

Average species richness was greater in fishless kettle lakes than

stocked kettle lakes (lfishless = 9.4, lstocked = 5.2; t[12] = 2.520,

P = 0.026), although the magnitude of difference was less in kettle

lakes than in headwater lakes. In particular, Dytiscidae richness

was markedly greater in both fishless headwater (lfishless = 2.4,

lstocked = 0.0; t[7] = 3.800, P = 0.007) and fishless kettle (l =

2.5fishless, lstocked = 0.3; t[9]=3.800, P = 0.004) lakes. Corixidae demonstrated

the greatest richness (8) at the genus level in our

collections (Arctocorixa, Callicorixa, Cenocorixa, Graptocorixa,

Hesperocorixa, Neocorixa, Palmacorixa, Sigara), and fishless headwater

lakes contained >4 times more genera than stocked headwater

lakes (lfishless = 3.3, lstocked = 0.5; t[14]=4.075, P = 0.001). Corixidae

genus richness did not differ in stocked and fishless kettle lakes

(lfishless = 2.6, lstocked = 2.5; t[12]=0.139, P = 0.892). Stocking duration had a significant effect on total macroinvertebrate

abundance: all pairwise comparisons of total macroinverte-brate abundance were significantly different between fishless,

3 year duration, and 40 year duration lakes (Fig. 4; Table 3). Fewer

macroinvertebrate families were collected in 40 year duration than

3 year duration lakes, with nine of 15 families present in fishless

lakes absent from 40 year duration lakes, compared to three families

absent from 3 year duration lakes. Dytiscidae, Notonectidae,

and Haliplidae abundances were less in 3 year duration than fishless

lakes. Dytiscidae and Haliplidae abundances were similar in

3 year and 40 year duration lakes; whereas, Notonectidae abundance

was less in 40 year duration than 3 year duration lakes. Corixidae

abundance was similar in fishless and 3 year duration lakes

but was less in 40 year duration lakes than both fishless and 3 year

duration lakes. Average species richness became reduced within

3 years after fish introduction (i.e., significant difference between

fishless and 3 year duration lakes) and remained low in 40 year

duration lakes (Table 3). Five of six fishless bioindicator taxa

(G. liberus, Dineutus spp., Callicorixa spp., C. americanus, N. insulata)

were present in at least two fishless lakes and were absent from

3 year duration and 40 year duration lakes. 


xdiscussion
 Macroinvertebrate communities in historically fishless headwater

and kettle lakes were altered dramatically by introduced fish,

with rarefaction and elimination of several taxa. Our results agree

with previous studies of effects of introduced fish on macroinvertebrates

in historically fishless headwater lakes stocked with trout

(Luecke, 1990; Liss et al., 1995; Bradford et al., 1998; Carlisle and

Hawkins, 1998; Knapp et al., 2001, 2005). We also demonstrate

negative effects of introduced fish on macroinvertebrate diversity

and abundance in kettle lakes stocked with a variety of fish species.

Kettle lakes are distributed throughout formerly glaciated regions

of North America, and many of these are affected by anthropogenic

activities. It is likely that the most hydrologically isolated kettle

lakes, such as those that completely lack surface water connections

even at high water, formerly were fishless. Anthropogenic methods

for introducing fish may vary regionally (angler and/or state initiated

stocking in northeastern lakes; anthropogenic-induced connectivity

via surface ditching in Midwestern lakes (Hanson et al.,

2005)), however, the negative effects of introduced fish on native

communities likely are similar.

Fishless kettle and headwater lakes support similar macroinvertebrate

communities, despite differences in lake physical characteristics

(i.e., elevation, pH, habitat structure; Schilling et al.,

2009). Both lake types support taxonomically-rich macroinvertebrate

communities, with abundant populations of large-bodied, active,

conspicuous invertebrates (Schilling et al., 2009). Although

the pre-stocking faunal composition of kettle and headwater lakes

is similar, our results showed that macroinvertebrate communities

in stocked headwater lakes deviated more from the original fishless

condition than in stocked kettle lakes, with long term repetitive

stocking exacerbating predatory effects. Stocked headwater

lakes had greatly reduced abundances of taxa that characterize

fishless lake macroinvertebrate communities (e.g., Notonectidae,

Corixidae, Dytiscidae, Aeshnidae, Libellulidae, Chaoboridae), with

some taxa eliminated completely (e.g., fishless bioindicator taxa)

soon after stocking occurs. Fewer of these taxa were affected by

introduced fish in kettle lakes (Table 2). It should be noted that our sampling methods targeted free-swimming macroinvertebrates,

thus under-representing other subsets of the community

(e.g., organisms associated with benthic sediments) that may or

may not be preyed upon by fish. It is possible that some taxa were

unaffected or possibly benefitted from fish introductions (via release

in predation by predatory invertebrates). Future studies

would benefit from incorporating multiple sampling techniques

to accurately represent the full suite of taxa inhabiting the lakes.

Below we discuss three non-mutually exclusive hypotheses that

may explain the strong effect of introduced trout in our headwater

study lakes. First, the insularity of headwater lakes may limit macroinvertebrate

dispersal, resulting in local adaptation and inability

to respond when fish are introduced. Second, headwater fishless

lakes are structurally simple systems compared with kettle lakes

and thus lack refugia that might reduce invertebrate vulnerability

to fish predation. Finally, repeatedly stocking trout in headwater

lakes may exacerbate their effects on native fauna. Although this

study was not designed to test these hypotheses future research

will benefit from the questions raised by discussing them. Strong effects of trout in headwater lakes may be due to the

inability of macroinvertebrate prey to respond appropriately to

predators with which they do not naturally coexist (McPeek,

1990; Stoks et al., 2003). While studies have found avoidance responses

to fish by invertebrate prey in fishless streams (Tikkanen

et al., 1996; McIntosh and Peckarsky, 1999), invertebrates may

be less responsive to changes in predator regimes in headwater

lakes. Aerial dispersal of adults between fishless and fish-containing

streams may be key to maintaining flexible predator avoidance

behavior (Tikkanen et al., 1996). When invertebrate dispersal is

limited, however, flexible avoidance behaviors may be lost as consecutive

generations of potential prey experience the same predation

regime (Abjornsson et al., 2004). Although many of the taxa

affected by fish introductions in headwater lakes have winged

adult stages, headwater lakes occupy cirques in constrained basins

where topographic barriers and disjunction from wetlands (Schilling

et al., 2008) may impede dispersal to habitats containing fish.

Limited dispersal would result in local adaptation and the inability

to respond when fish are introduced. Structural complexity created by submergent vegetation can

weaken the topñdown effects of fish on macroinvertebrates (Crowder

and Cooper, 1982; Gilinsky, 1984; Diehl, 1992; Carlisle and

Hawkins, 1998; Wissinger et al., 2006). Therefore, stronger effects

of fish on prey communities in headwater lakes with simple habitat

structure, and weaker effects in kettle lakes with complex habitat

structure should be anticipated. Extensive littoral and benthic

sphagnum mats typical of kettle lakes likely provide macroinvertebrates

refuge from fish predation (Henrikson, 1993). Our results

are consistent with studies in western North America that document

the effectiveness of introduced trout as littoral predators in

historically fishless high-elevation lakes with simple habitat structure

compared to lower elevation sites with more complex habitat

structure (Knapp et al., 2005). Repeated stocking is more common in headwater than kettle

lakes. Most introduced fish populations in kettle lakes are naturalized

and not supplemented by additional stocking. The majority of

headwater lakes are stocked annually with brook trout, based on

the assumption that winterkills and lack of suitable spawning habitat

prevent fish from persisting in these lakes. These lakes are not

re-surveyed before annual stocking, so over-winter survival and

spawning of stocked fish is unknown. Similar assumptions commonly

are made by fisheries managers throughout the western

USA and often result in frequent stocking of self-sustaining trout

populations (Armstrong and Knapp, 2004). Because predation pressure

increases with fish density (Pierce and Hinrichs, 1997), regularly

stocking lakes that also may have reproducing trout

populations likely intensifies the effects on native fauna. Continual

stocking of trout in high-elevation lakes exacerbates their effect on

ecosystem processes (Schindler et al., 2001), and historically fishless

lakes with greater densities of introduced trout exhibit stronger

negative effects of fish predation on native macroinvertebrates

than lakes with lower fish densities (Knapp et al., 2005). Thus,

greater fish densities in regularly stocked lakes may explain the

stronger effect of introduced fish in headwater lakes than kettle

lakes, despite greater fish species richness in kettle lakes.

The longer a headwater fishless lake in Maine is repeatedly

stocked, the more dramatic the effects on native fauna. Fishless

bioindicators were not present in headwater lakes after only

3 years of stocking. The most pronounced effects of stocked fish

on native macroinvertebrates, in terms of reductions in abundance

and elimination of taxa, however, were observed in lakes with long

stocking histories. The largest, most conspicuous macroinvertebrates

are affected quickly by fish, whereas others are affected

more gradually as fish become more food-limited. Thus, macroinvertebrate

communities are perturbed soon after fishless lakes

are stocked for the first time, and continued stocking exacerbates

the original effects (see also Schindler et al., 2001). Fishless lakes support unique macroinvertebrate communities

and play a critical role in maintaining aquatic biodiversity across

the landscape (Knapp et al., 2001; Stoks and McPeek, 2003; Schilling

et al., 2009). Our study demonstrates the deleterious effects of

introduced fish on these increasingly rare freshwater ecosystems

and shows that communities in headwater lakes with long stocking

histories are particularly vulnerable. The potential for recovery

of native faunal assemblages likely declines the longer fish are

present and the more widespread the spatial extent of stocking

due to loss of proximate recolonization opportunities (Bradford

et al., 1993). Given the declining number of these aquatic ecosystems

throughout northeastern North America (Schilling et al.,

2008) and elsewhere (Donald, 1987; Bahls, 1992; Pister, 2001; Denoel

et al., 2005) and their role in maintaining biodiversity, we suggest

that historically fishless lakes be prioritized for conservation

and restoration. Knowing that introduced fish rapidly (within

3 years) affect headwater lake communities and recognizing that

the geographic isolation of headwater lakes could limit community

recovery once fish are introduced, currently fishless headwater

lakes might be proactively protected from future fish introductions.

These lakes may be more easily protected than fishless kettle

lakes which are found at lower elevations and are more accessible

to humans. Conservation planning for naturally fishless lakes in

eastern North America lags behind that in western North America

where restoring stocked fishless lakes serves as a model for recovery

of these systems (Milliron, 1999; Hoffman et al., 2004; Yosemite

National Park, 2006; Bunn et al., 2007; Knapp et al., 2007). A key

obstacle in protecting these habitats is that agencies responsible

for their conservation often also are charged with providing public

angling opportunities by maintaining and expanding fish stocking.

We suggest that agencies resolve these conflicting management

goals and adopt strategies that protect these unique and increasingly

rare ecosystems.