xabstract Invasive plants can simplify plant community structure, alter ecosystem processes
and undermine the ecosystem services that we derive from biotic diversity. Two
invasive plants, purple loosestrife (
Lythrum salicaria
) and reed canary grass (
Phalaris
arundinacea
), are becoming the dominant species in many wetlands across temperate
North America. We used a horizontal, observational study to estimate per capita
effects (PCEs) of purple loosestrife and reed canary grass on plant diversity in 24
wetland communities in the Pacific Northwest, USA. Four measures of diversity were
used: the number of species (S), evenness of relative abundance (J), the Shannonñ
Wiener index (H
'
) and Simpsonís index (D). We show that (1) the PCEs on biotic
diversity were similar for both invasive species among the four measures of
diversity we examined; (2) the relationship between plant diversity and invasive
plant abundance ranges from linear (constant slope) to negative exponential (variable
slope), the latter signifying that the PCEs are density-dependent; (3) the PCEs were
density-dependent for measures of diversity sensitive to the number of species (S,
H
'
, D) but not for the measure that relied solely upon relative abundance (J); and (4)
invader abundance was not correlated with other potential influences on biodiversity
(hydrology, soils, topography). These results indicate that both species are capable of
reducing plant community diversity, and management strategies need to consider
the simultaneous control of multiple species if the goal is to maintain diverse plant
communities.


 xintroduction


 The increasing number, distribution and abundance of invasive
plant species are reducing biological diversity worldwide (Vitousek
et al
., 1997; Wilcove
et al
., 1998; Mack
et al
., 2000). Declines in
plant diversity can alter ecosystem functions and services (Schulze
& Mooney, 1994; Kinzig
et al
., 2001). To respond effectively to
invasive species problems, we require quantitative measures of
the impact of invaders on diversity. The impact (I) of an invader
depends on the invaders abundance (A), distribution (D) and
per capita effect (E) according to the equation: I = A
◊
D
◊
E
(Parker
et al
., 1999). Estimates of the abundance and distribution
of invaders are widely reported, but estimates of per capita effects
are rare (Parker
et al
., 1999). Quantitative measures of the sign
and strength of per capita effects are necessary to (1) understand
how invasive organisms affect natural environments, (2) prioritize
weed management actions, and (3) determine what levels of control
are needed to achieve an acceptable level of impact. Here we
report results of a horizontal, observational study assessing how
severely two invasive plants, purple loosestrife (
Lythrum salicaria
L. Lythraceae) and reed canary grass (
Phalaris arundinacea
L.
Poaceae), reduce wetland plant diversity as invader abundance
increases.
The expected response of biotic diversity to an introduced
species depends on the relative abundance the invader attains in the
community. The organism may be a ëweak invaderí and may colonize
and persist at low abundance with minimal influence on other
species, thus incrementally increasing species richness (Ortega
& Pearson, 2005). However, as a ëstrong invaderí increases in
density, abundances of most other species are expected to decrease,
increasing the probability of local extinctions, eventually reducing
both species richness and evenness of abundance among
species (Parker
et al
., 1999; Myers & Bazely, 2003; Ortega &
Pearson, 2005).
Community diversity and invader abundance can be linked in
a complex positive feedback relationship whereby increases in invader abundance lead to decreases in diversity that in turn lead
to increasing invader abundance (Fig. 1). In extreme cases, this
positive feedback loop can lead to community collapse or ëinvasion
meltdowní (Simberloff & Von Holle, 1999). To investigate
the feedback relationship, one needs to interrupt the feedback,
controlling one factor and measuring the response of the other.
Thus, some studies control diversity and measure the response of
the invader, showing that increasing diversity sometimes decreases
the abundance of an invader, i.e. increases the communityís
resistance to invasion (Kinzig
et al
., 2001). Other studies control
the invader abundance and measure the response of diversity,
showing that increasing invader abundance sometimes decreases
diversity (Parker
et al
., 1999; Goodell
et al
., 2000). Taken together,
these studies indicate how low diversity can be both a cause and /
or a consequence of invasions: as increasing invader abundance
decreases diversity, the decrease in diversity facilitates still further
increase in invader abundance. For our study species, prior
experiments conducted in an artificial garden and greenhouse
environments show that increasing abundance of these invaders
can decrease diversity (Weiher
et al
., 1996; Green & Galatowitsch,
2002; Kercher & Zedler, 2004). Here we extend those studies by
showing how increasing invader abundance can decrease diversity
under natural field conditions. To isolate the effect of invader
abundance on diversity, we show that three additional factors
(hydrology, soils, topography) known to influence diversity did not
covary with invader abundance. Purple loosestrife and reed canary grass are two invasive emergent
wetland plants that currently dominate vegetation in many
wetlands across temperate North America (Galatowitsch
et al
.,
1999; Magee
et al
., 1999; Blossey
et al
., 2001). Both species are
known to form dense monospecific stands that may negatively
affect local wetland plant and animal communities (Galatowitsch
et al
., 1999; Merigliano & Lesica, 1998; Blossey
et al
., 2001).
Purple loosestrife is a tall perennial wetland plant native to
Europe. Two thorough reviews of the biology, ecology and history
of invasion in North America of purple loosestrife are found
in Thompson
et al
. (1987) and Mal
et al
. (1992). Purple loosestrife
is an invasive species that is thought to displace native
wetland vegetation in wetlands and riparian areas. Early reports
of adverse effects published prior to 1998 have been criticized
(Anderson, 1995; Hager & McCoy, 1998). Subsequent reports
have not resolved whether loosestrife negatively affects wetland
diversity. Two articles summarize what had been known to date
as suspected and documented negative effects (Blossey, 1999;
Blossey
et al
., 2001). Direct evidence that purple loosestrife can
dominate wetland plant assemblages and reduce species richness
is provided by extended germination trials (Weiher
et al
., 1996),
tests of competitive response (Johansson & Keddy, 1991; Keddy
et al
., 1998), removal studies using herbicides (Gabor
et al
.,
1996) and increases in plant diversity following biological control
(Landis
et al
., 2003). However, not all recent studies agree
that purple loosestrife reduces the diversity of local wetland plant
communities (Treberg & Husband, 1999; Farnsworth & Elis,
2001; Morrison, 2002; Hager & Vinebrook, 2004; Houlahan &
Findlay, 2004). More research is needed to clarify the negative
effects of purple loosestrife, specifically a representative sample
to discover what levels of invader abundance decrease diversity
and a random sample to discover how often invader abundance
reaches these levels.
Reed canary grass is a perennial wetland plant. Its origin is
currently in dispute, and some believe it has mixed origins stemming
from hybridization of North American and European populations
(Galatowitsch
et al
., 1999; Lavergne & Molofsky, 2004).
Its competitive ability and rapid growth make reed canary grass
both a useful forage plant and an aggressive invader (see review
in Lavergne & Molofsky, 2004). Studies in mesocosms have
shown that it is capable of out-competing other wetland species,
particularly when nutrient concentrations are elevated (Green &
Galatowitsch, 2002; Kercher & Zedler, 2004; Mahaney
et al
.,
2004) and under conditions of increased sedimentation (Mahaney
et al
., 2004). Reed canary grass is associated with reduction of
native plant species in a survey of 58 wetlands in south-western
Ontario (Houlahan & Findlay, 2004). In addition, presence of
reed canary grass (often approaching 75ñ100% cover) impedes
revegetation efforts in prairie pothole wetlands in the midwestern
USA (Mulhouse & Galatowitsch, 2003). In a study of 96 randomly
chosen wetlands in north-west Oregon, reed canary grass was
present in 93% of the sites (Magee
et al
., 1999). In a subset of 43
wetlands, canary grass was found in 813 of 1026 plots (79%) and
when present had a mean cover of 67% (Magee & Kentula, 2005).
Unlike purple loosestrife, all studies of reed canary grass concur
that it is capable of reducing plant diversity. Environmental variables that are correlated with invasive plant
abundance may influence plant diversity. To control for these
potential environmental effects, the wetlands were characterized
by (1) hydrologic regime, (2) wetland microtopography, and
(3) soil characteristics. The environmental data were used to assess
whether covarying environmental factors may be responsible for
the observed patterns of diversity. A result of no relationship
between the abundance of the invasive species and the environmental
factors strengthens the evidence that the invasive species are the
cause of the diversity patterns observed.
Hydrologic regime (duration of inundation) is the primary
factor influencing the diversity of wetland plant communities
(Van der Valk
et al
., 1994; Magee
et al
., 1999; Silvertown
et al
.,
1999; Azous & Cooke, 2000; Keddy, 2000; Mitsch & Gosselink,
2000) with the greatest number of plant species coexisting in
seasonally flooded freshwater habitats (Keddy, 2000) like the wet
meadows that are the focus of this study. Topographical variation
and cyclic water level fluctuation create a landscape of waxing
and waning soil oxygen concentrations. Plant roots need oxygen
to respire, and standing water slows the rate at which plant roots
obtain oxygen from the environment. In addition, water depth
influences seed germination rates and photosynthetic ability
(Keddy, 2000). Theoretically, habitats with greater topographical
heterogeneity should provide a greater diversity of niches and
thereby allow a greater number of species to coexist (Whittaker,
1965; Grime, 1973; Grubb, 1977). Therefore, reduced variation in
microtopography should lead to a fewer number of plant species
per unit area regardless of invasive species dominance.
Another factor that may influence plant diversity is soil fertility,
where more fertile conditions tend to be associated with fewer
species and greater biomass of the dominant species (Auclair
et al
., 1976; Weiher
et al
., 1996; Bedford
et al
., 1999; Keddy,
2000). Nitrogen is considered the primary limiting nutrient for
plant growth in emergent marsh ecosystems, followed by phosphorus
(Bedford
et al
., 1999; Keddy, 2000; Mitsch & Gosselink,
2000; Bridgham
et al
., 2001). There is evidence that phosphorus
may be limiting in some urban wetlands (Woo & Zedler, 2002). Carbon, potassium and micronutrients (primarily Mn, Mg and
Ca) may also be limiting nutrients for plant growth, but we found
no prior literature that presents evidence that these nutrients are
limiting in emergent wetland ecosystems. Based on prior evidence and field observations, we predicted that
(1) both purple loosestrife and reed canary grass are capable of
forming dense stands that can negatively affect community
diversity; (2) as invader abundance increases, plant community
diversity will decrease; and (3) the negative effect of canary grass
is greater than that of purple loosestrife. Our analysis is based on
(1) an observational survey of wetlands in the Pacific Northwest
stratified to yield a range in invader abundance, (2) multiple
measures of diversity, and (3) assessment of potentially confounding
variables (hydrology, soils, topography) that might
combine with invader abundance to influence diversity. xmethods This study was based on a representative sample of 24 wetland
field sites chosen to span a range in the abundance of each invader
(Fig. 2, see Appendix S1 for site information). Sixteen sites were
established in the Willamette Valley, Oregon, four study sites
were established on islands within the Columbia River Estuary,
and an additional four sites were located east of the Cascade
Mountain Range along the Columbia and Snake Rivers. Twenty sites are seasonally flooded emergent palustrine wetlands and
the four estuary sites are tidally influenced freshwater wetlands
inundated on a monthly cycle. The plant community at all sites
was dominated by herbaceous vegetation and at none of the sites
was the vegetation being actively managed. Sites were selected
based on: (1) wetland type, (2) abundance of purple loosestrife or
reed canary grass, (3) area and shape of invasive-species stand,
(4) accessibility, (5) permission to sample, and (6) probability that
the site would not be modified during the study. We could not
choose sites based on a stratified random selection method because
the necessary data did not exist. Instead, we employed a quasiexperimental
approach using site matching along with assessing
the covariance between invader abundance and potentially influential
environmental variables. 

Percentage plant cover was measured for each vascular plant species
at each of the 24 sites during July 2001. Each sample universe
was circular, with a 50-m radius (7854 m
2
). Thirty 1 m
2
plots were
randomly selected from within 50 m of a centre point. This was
done by randomly selecting a direction (1-360
∞
with north at 360
∞
)
and a random distance between 0 and 2500 m, of which the square
root of the result was the radial distance to the plot. This permitted
sampling in proportion to area, which increases as the square of
the radius with increasing radial distance from the centre of the circle.
The percentage cover of each plant species was visually estimated
in each plot to the nearest 1%. Due to overlapping canopy cover,
the total cover for each plot sometimes exceeded 100%.
We sampled plant abundance non-destructively using the
visual cover estimation method because many of the sites were
mitigation wetlands, parks or other sensitive areas where we could
not destructively sample biomass. To avoid the additional source
of error introduced by multiple observers (Sykes
et al
., 1983), the
lead author sampled all sites. The observer was trained prior to
making measurements by calibrating cover estimates using a
series of figures where the percentage cover had been calculated.
The observer tested against the figures again after measuring the
sites to determine change in bias with experience.
Species identifications and nomenclature follow Hitchcock
and Cronquist (1973). A voucher collection of the plant species
sampled was assembled. Richard Halse (Department of Botany
and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University) verified the voucher
plant identifications and these specimens were deposited in the
Oregon State University Herbarium. Sampling adequacy was analysed by constructing speciesñarea
curves for each site using multivariate analysis software (
??
-
???
,
McCune & Mefford, 1999). The speciesñarea curves were calculated
using a nonparametric resampling procedure (jackknife). This
procedure determines the number of unique species in 500 randomly
selected ëresampledí combinations of subsamples (1 m
2
plots) for each increase in level of sampling area (1ñ30 plots)
(McCune & Mefford, 1999; McCune & Grace, 2002). Then, the
mean and standard deviation are calculated for each level of
effort (stepwise increase of total area sampled). If the mean
number of species reaches a plateau, it suggests fewer species are
being added through each subsequent increase in sample area
and therefore the majority of the species within the site have been
sampled (McCune & Grace, 2002).
We qualitatively examined community structure between sites
using rank-abundance diagrams. Rank-abundance diagrams plot
mean species abundance against species rank (Whittaker, 1965;
Magurran, 1988) thereby visually integrating the two diversity
components, species richness and evenness (Fisher
et al
., 1943;
Peet, 1974; Magurran, 1988). The width of the curve represents
the species richness of the site, and the slope indicates the degree
of unevenness or dominance.
We quantitatively examined diversity using four standard
nonparametric community diversity descriptors. These were
species richness (S), Pielouís evenness (J), ShannonñWiener
diversity index (H
'
) and Simpsonís index of diversity (D) (equations
from Magurran, 1988). The indices S, H
'
and D were transformed
to Hillís Series (N
a
), where N
0
= S, N
1
= exp(H
'
) and
N
2
= (1/D) (Hill, 1973). We first tested whether the abundance
of the two invader species differently affected diversity. The
summed residual error in linear regression models fit separately
for each species was compared with the residual error in a full
model that pooled the observations for both species (Snedecor &
Cochran, 1967). The result of no significant difference in summed
error between the separately fit models and the error in the
pooled model indicates no difference between the effect of the
abundance of the two invasive species and the diversity measure
being examined. We then applied linear regression analysis to
determine whether to reject the null hypothesis of no significant
relationship between plant abundance and the measures of
diversity. Data were transformed where necessary to improve
normality and equality of variance before applying regression
analyses.
We assessed the effect of dominant plant cover on native vascular
plant species richness and abundance. Native species status
was determined from Hitchcock and Cronquist (1973). Proportion
of the number of native species per site and combined cover
of all native plants per site were plotted against the mean abundance
of the dominant plant to examine whether native plants
were more negatively affected than introduced plants. As with
the measures of diversity, regression analysis was used to determine
whether the observed trends were significant.
We looked for negative patterns of association consistent with
the hypothesis that the two species are competitors. The interaction
was quantified as the correlation between the abundances
of the two invasive species. Significance of the trend was tested
by computing a correlation coefficient and by determining its
significance using a
t
-test (Moore & McCabe, 2001). In March and April of 2001, a shallow well was sunk at each of the
sites to measure water level throughout the year. Wells consisted
of a 1.3-m PVC tube (5 cm inside diameter) with opposing perforations
(1 cm diameter) at 10 cm intervals down each side. The
bottom was capped and had two perforations. The tube was then
wrapped with fibreglass window-screening (2 mm mesh) on the
exterior to prevent sediment accumulation. The wells were installed
to extend 1 m below the ground surface by digging a hole with a
soil auger, inserting the well, and filling in with sand. Water levels
were taken at monthly intervals over a span of 21 months.
The microtopographical basin survey method used a surveyor
grade differentially correcting GPS receiver (Trimble Navigation
Limited, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) in conjunction with a rotating
laser level (Latec Instruments Inc., Ontario, Canada) to obtain a
digital elevation model (DEM, grid-based contour map) of each
site. A laser level was set at each site and the distance to ground
from the laser plane was measured at the well (usually within 2 m
from centre). A laser sensing device and stadia rod (Crain Enterprises,
Mound City, IL, USA) were used to map deviation from
the laser level plane to the ground surface for multiple locations
(50ñ100) at each site.
The data were then downloaded and differentially corrected
using
??????????
software (version 4.1, Trimble). The GPS
receiver, through real-time and post-processing differential
correction, was able to locate the horizontal position of a given
survey point within a calculated precision of < 1.0 m. Louhaichi
et al
. (2003) studied this technique and reported a vertical accuracy
of 1ñ3 cm for agricultural fields. Using
???????
(version
3.2, ESRI, Redlands, CA, USA), the elevation of each point was
relativized to the elevation of the well. These point data were then
used to interpolate an elevation grid with 1
◊
1 m cells (7854
cells) for each site (Schooler, 2003).
The hydrological regimes were compared among sites using
mean water depth (cm), maximum water depth (cm), range of water
depth (cm), cumulative water volume (m
3
/year), cumulative area
inundated (m
2
/year), maximum area inundated (m
2
), and the
number of months to 50 and 90% drawdown. Elevation and
topographical variation were included as separate variables as
they may influence plant diversity independent from their role in
defining intrasite flooding regimes. Elevation above sea level for
each site was acquired from digital elevation models (USGS-DEM).
To assess soil characteristics, we collected soil samples from
four randomly selected locations within wetland sites during
June of 2002. Samples were taken by first removing the top 5 cm
of soil from the centre of the plot using a spade. Then the next
5 cm (
c
. 2 L) was placed into a paper bag. Prior studies have
found no significant difference in soil properties (organic C, N,
pH, Ca and Mg) within small (0.25ñ0.35 ha) palustrine wetland
sites among samples taken at the same depth (Stolt
et al
., 2001).
Therefore, we restricted soil sampling to the root zone at a single
depth (5ñ10 cm below surface) within and across sites (Binkley
& Vitousek, 1989).
The soil characteristics measured were: total nitrogen, nitrate,
ammonium, mineralizable ammonium, total phosphorus, phosphate,
organic carbon, potassium, magnesium, calcium, manganese,
conductivity, acidity and percentage of sand/silt /clay. Since variation
of nutrients within a site may contribute to diversity, we
also included the standard deviation of the soil variables in the
analysis. Soil nutrient analyses were conducted by the Oregon
State University Department of Crop and Soil Science Soils
Laboratory, and physical soil properties were measured under
the direction of Crop and Soil Science staff using their methods
(Horneck
et al
., 1989). Random number generation and data entry were performed in
Excel (Office XP, Microsoft 2002). Spatial data were collected
using a Trimble Surveyor (XR Pro) global positioning system
receiver (GPS) with real-time and post-processing differential
correction capable of submetre spatial accuracy. Spatial data
were differentially corrected using
??????????
Office software
(version 2.70, Trimble 2000).
???????
(version 3.2, ESRI 1999)
was used to calculate basin topography. Linear regression and
multiple regression analyses were performed using
?
-
????
(version
6.1, Insightful 2002, Seattle, WA, USA). The community
analysis software
?????
(version 4.17, MjM 2002, Gleneden
Beach, OR, USA) was used to compute speciesñarea curves and
implement canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) ordination
procedures.
CCA was used to determine whether the conditions of the reference
uninvaded wetlands adequately represented those of the
invaded wetlands. CCA is a direct gradient analysis method that
seeks to structure one data matrix so as to maximize the strength
of the relationships with a second matrix (McCune & Grace,
2002; Anderson & Willis, 2003). We used the method to constrain
an ordination of the site characteristics by the abundance of
purple loosestrife and reed canary grass. A Monte Carlo test was
then used to evaluate whether the environmental variables were
significantly related to the abundance of the invasive plant species.
A finding of no significant difference among the correlations of
the real data set and the randomized data sets suggests that the
relationship between the matrices is not stronger than that
expected by random chance and supports the hypothesis of no
linear relationship between the two matrices (Ramsey & Schafer,
1997; McCune & Grace, 2002). The main data matrix consisted
of the wetland habitat parameters and the second matrix contained
the mean proportional cover of loosestrife and reed
canary grass for the wetland sites. Since CCA incorporates linear
regression, assumptions of normality and constant variance were
examined for the abundances of invasive species in the second
matrix. Normality was improved using an arcsine square-root
transformation on the proportional cover data (McCune &
Mefford, 1999).
xresults The overall plant community composition of the 24 wetland sites
consisted of 196 vascular plant species distributed within 36 families
(see Appendix S2 for plant species information). The six families with the most species recorded were the: Poaceae (23),
Fabaceae (17), Asteraceae (17), Cyperaceae (17), Rosaceae (11) and
Juncaceae (9). Native species comprised 60% of the regional wetland
flora (118 species) while 34% (67) were exotic plant species. The
origins (native or introduced) of 11 species (6%) were unknown.
Ten plant species were dominant (most abundant in the
community) across the 24 wetland sites. Purple loosestrife was
dominant at seven sites (13.8ñ91.7% cover), reed canary grass
dominated six sites (18.8ñ94.7%) and the remaining 11 sites
were dominated by eight other plant species (12.5ñ47.8%). These
species were:
Alopecurus pratensis
,
Juncus effusus
,
Typha latifolia
,
Oenanthe sarmentosa
,
Eleocharis palustris
,
Scirpus microcarpus
,
Veronica americana
and
Carex obnupta
(see Appendix S3 for
complete data set of plant abundance by site information). 


The speciesñarea curves reached a plateau for the plant communities
at the wetland sites, creating a reliable basis for comparing
species richness among sites (Fig. 3). Rank-abundance diagrams
of the plant community at the 24 wetland sites indicate that as
the abundance of purple loosestrife and reed canary grass increase
and approach 100% cover, species richness and evenness invariably
decrease (Fig. 4). Sites not dominated by the invasive species
tend to have a greater number of species and have more equitable
distributions of abundances between species.
Comparison of regression models indicated that there was no
difference between the effect of purple loosestrife and reed canary
grass abundance on any of the four diversity measures (Table 1).
Data were transformed (S, and D, natural log; H
'
, square root)
before analysis, which stabilized variances. Evenness (J) did not
require transformation. Finding no difference between invader
species in the effect of invader abundance on diversity, we pooled
data for the two invader species in subsequent analyses.
All measures of diversity decreased with increasing abundance
of the dominant plant species. Regression analysis indicated that
trends were significant (Table 2). Analyses were conducted on
transformed data when necessary to meet assumptions of
constant variance and linearity (S, and D, natural log; H
'
, square
root). The data for S, H
'
and D are plotted as Hillís Series values
without transformation for ease of interpretation and to facilitate
comparison between diversity measures (Fig. 5añc).
Species richness (N
0
) ranged from 4 to 46 species (Fig. 5a).
Fanno Creek (FC), an urban site (within city boundary) dominated
by reed canary grass (95% canopy cover), included only
three other plant species all of which were introduced including
blackberry (
Rubus discolor
), bedstraw (
Galium aparine
) and
nightshade (
Solanum dulcamara
). An urban site, Pickle Pond
(PP), and a rural site, Champoeg State Park (CP), tied for a total
of 46 plant species despite CP being dominated by the introduced
grass, short-awned foxtail (
A. pratensis
(48%)) and PP being a restored urban wetland (Rivergate Industrial District)
with small amounts of both reed canary grass (2%) and purple
loosestrife (14%). The number of species within each site
decreased exponentially as the cover of the dominant species
increased (Fig. 4a).
Hillís N1 (exp(ShannonñWiener index)) ranged from 1.1 (FC)
to 24.0 (PP and AB) and was associated with cover of the dominant
species in a negative exponential relationship (Fig. 5b).
Hillís N2 (reciprocal of Simpsonís index) ranged from 1.0 (FC) to
18.8 (AB) and also decreased exponentially with increasing cover
of the dominant species (Fig. 5c).
Pielouís Evenness ranged from 0.04 at Fanno Creek (FC) to
0.86 at Apache Bluff Wetland (AB). Apache Bluff is an urban
wetland (Tualatin) dominated by short-awned foxtail (13%). As
with species richness, evenness declined with the increasing
abundance of the dominant species (Fig. 5d). However, the relationship
was linear, indicating that the evenness of abundance
between plant species is less sensitive to changes in the cover of
dominant species when at low abundance than are the measures
of diversity influenced by species richness.
We also examined whether native plant species richness and
abundance were associated with increasing cover of the dominant
species. Linear regression indicated that the percentage of
native plant species (PNS) at each site did not decrease with
increasing abundance (x) of the dominant plant species (PNS =
-0.27x + 65.6, R2 = 0.16, MSE = 296.8, t23 = 2.04, P = 0.053)
(Fig. 6a). However, this low P value is heavily influenced by one
reed canary grass-dominated site (FC) that contained only four
introduced plant species. Removing this outlier increases the
P value to 0.34 (t22 = 0.98). However, abundance of native species (ANS) declined exponentially with increasing cover of the dominant
species (ln ANS = -0.04x + 4.85, R2 = 0.74, MSE = 0.41,
t23 = 7.97, P = 6.3 ◊ 10-8) (Fig. 6b). Abundance was transformed by
the natural log before regression analysis to stabilize residuals, improve
normality and make the relationship approximately linear.
Untransformed data are presented for ease of interpretation.
Correlation analysis was used to determine the relationship
between reed canary grass and purple loosestrife. The two species
were negatively correlated (r = ñ0.65). The test for zero population
correlation indicated that the negative relationship between
purple loosestrife and reed canary grass was significant (t22 = 4.0,
P = 0.0006).
We also used correlation to assess the accuracy of the percentage
cover observations. The observer determined the percentage
cover of space occupied in a series of images both before and after
determining plant cover in field plots. The test for zero population
correlation indicated that the positive relationships were
significant for both the before (r = 0.98, t12 = 18.85, P < 0.0001)
and after (r = 0.99, t12 = 31.15, P < 0.0001) data. There was a negative correlation between the abundances of the
two invasive species comprising the second matrix (r = ñ0.39).
Axis 1 was primarily associated with the abundance of purple
loosestrife (r = ñ0.99), whereas axis 2 was associated with the
abundance of reed canary grass (r = ñ0.86). The Monte Carlo randomization procedure was run 100 times and the result was
compared with that of the nonrandomized data. The Monte
Carlo test statistic indicated that the relationship between loosestrife
abundance (axis 1) and the environmental variables was
not significantly greater than expected by chance (P = 0.17). The
relationship between reed canary grass abundance (axis 2) and
the environmental variables was also not statistically significant
(P = 0.47). xdiscussion 
The primary objective of this study was to measure and compare
the per capita effects (PCEs) of two invasive plant species on wetland
plant diversity. We have shown that (1) the relationship
between plant diversity and invasive plant abundance ranges
from linear (constant slope) to negative exponential (variable
slope), the latter signifying that the PCEs are density-dependent;
(2) the PCEs on biotic diversity were similar for both invasive
species among the four measures of diversity we examined;
(3) the PCEs were density-dependent for measures of diversity
sensitive to the number of species (S, H', D), but not for the
measure that relies solely on relative abundance (J); and (4) invader
abundance was not correlated with other potential influences on
plant diversity (hydrology, soils, topography).
One adverse effect of loosestrife and canary grass invasion is
the negative effect on native plant species richness and abundance.
During field sampling, we observed that native species
richness appeared to be more greatly reduced than the number of
introduced species in wetlands with high densities of loosestrife
and canary grass. After plotting the proportion of native species
against the percentage cover of the invasive species, we discerned
no clear pattern that the number of native species was reduced
more than that of the introduced species. However, the abundance
of native species is exponentially reduced by the introduced invasive
species, thus increasing risk of local extinction in the future. To
take an extreme example, Fanno Creek (FC) was entirely devoid
of native plant species.
In this study, we detected a strong negative association between
invader density and plant diversity. Previous research underscored
the uncertainty surrounding the impact of purple loosestrife
on biotic diversity and this uncertainty has fostered criticism
of biological control efforts. Prior to 1998, multiple papers report
purple loosestrifeís negative effect on community diversity
(Rawinski & Malecki, 1984; Thompson et al., 1987; Mal et al.,
1992), but subsequent papers criticize the results as inconsistent
and inconclusive (Anderson, 1995; Hager & McCoy, 1998). The
best evidence comes from an experimental study where loosestrife
dominated wetland plant assemblages consisting of 20
selected plant species under conditions of low water fluctuation
or high nutrient concentration (Weiher et al., 1996).
Since Hagar and McCoyís review (1998), six additional studies
that examined the influence of purple loosestrife on plant community
diversity (Treberg & Husband, 1999; Farnsworth & Ellis,
2001; Morrison, 2002; Landis et al., 2003; Hager & Vinebrook,
2004; Houlahan & Findlay, 2004) have been published. Treberg
and Husband (1999) studied 41 2 ◊ 2 m plots at one site along
the Bar River, Ontario. They found no significant effect of presence
of loosestrife or cover of loosestrife on mean species richness.
Farnsworth and Ellis (2001) studied the effect of purple loosestrife
abundance at five wetland sites in Connecticut. They
examined species richness in 30 1 m2 plots arrayed in a grid
within each wetland and found no significant relationship
between purple loosestrife density and species richness at the
1 m2 scale. However, biomass of loosestrife was negatively correlated
with biomass of other plant species. Morrison (2002)
examined the effect of loosestrife on plant community diversity
at two wetland sites in New York. At each site, nine 1 m2 plots
were established within three blocks. Within each block, one plot
was an unmanipulated control, one plot had all vegetation
removed and loosestrife was removed twice each year for 3 years,
and one plot had all vegetation removed and was subsequently
unmanipulated. Morrison detected no difference in species richness
between any of the treatments after 3 years. Landis et al.
(2003) examined the response of plant communities after the
reduction in abundance of purple loosestrife by biological agents
at five sites in Michigan. They measured species diversity within
1, 3.7 and 7.1 m2 plots, first in 1995 before the biological control
agents reduced biomass of loosestrife, then again in 2000 and
2001 after the agents reduced biomass by 61ñ95%. They found that
plant species richness significantly increased after the decline of
loosestrife biomass at all five sites. Hager and Vinebrook (2004)
examined 10 recently invaded wetlands in south-eastern Minnesota.
They sampled loosestrife abundance and plant richness in
six 0.5 ◊ 2.0 m (1 m2) plots in each wetland. Purple loosestrife
was positively associated with species richness when invaded
plots were compared to uninvaded plots. A survey by Houlahan
and Findlay (2004) sampled 58 wetlands in south-western
Ontario (mean size = 66.7 ha). They initially found a significant
negative association between reed canary grass and purple loosestrife
abundance and the number of native plant species, but the
relationship for purple loosestrife disappeared when other
predictor variables were included in the model. These six studies
provide contradictory evidence that both supports and refutes
the hypothesis that purple loosestrife abundance negatively
affects plant community diversity.
These inconsistent results may be the result of (1) differences
among studies in the spatial scale at which plant diversity was
measured, (2) differences in the range of loosestrife abundance
examined, and/or (3) environmental differences due to different
study locations. We weigh each of the possibilities in turn. First,
species richness is positively correlated with sample area (Whittaker,
1972; Magurran, 1988) and therefore the description of
diversity varies with the spatial scale of observation. Four studies
that found no decrease of plant diversity with increasing loosestrife
abundance measured species richness at small spatial
scales of 4 m2 (Treberg & Husband, 1999) or 1 m2 (Farnsworth &
Ellis, 2001; Morrison, 2002; Hager & Vinebrook, 2004), whereas
a study examining diversity at the 7.1 m2 scale (Landis et al.,
2003) and this study (7854 m2) found that high densities of purple
loosestrife were associated with reductions in wetland plant
diversity. Second, the range of loosestrife densities might differ
between studies. For example, the survey by Houlahan and Findlay (2004) found no effect of purple loosestrife abundance on plant
species richness in 58 wetlands in south-western Ontario. It is
difficult to assess why they did not detect a reduction in diversity
because they used a modified BrownñBlanquet abundanceestimation
method where their highest abundance level was
defined as ëmany individuals and dominant over > 20% total
wetland areaí. Therefore, at the two wetlands where loosestrife
was scored in this category, the cover of purple loosestrife could
have been 20ñ30%, in which case we might not expect to detect
an effect, or loosestrife cover may have been 70ñ95%, where we
would have expected to detect a difference (Fig. 5a). The ambiguity
of their classification makes comparing results difficult. Third,
the inconsistent results may be due to environmental differences,
perhaps the result of different site locations. All of the other
studies sampled wetlands in eastern regions of North America,
whereas this study examined wetlands in western North America.
Variation in environmental conditions between geographical
regions might influence the negative effect of purple loosestrife
on the diversity of plant communities.
Prior research on the negative effect of reed canary grass is less
controversial. Mesocosm experiments (Green & Galatowitsch,
2002; Kercher & Zedler, 2004) and field observations (Werner &
Zedler, 2002; Houlahan & Findlay, 2004) indicate that reed
canary grass is capable of out-competing and displacing other
wetland plants. Based on the consistency of these prior studies
and personal field observations, we initially expected that reed
canary grass would have a greater per capita negative effect on
plant diversity than purple loosestrife (McEvoy & Coombs,
2000). We observed that canary grass creates a thick litter layer
that impedes growth of other species where loosestrife does not
produce a dense layer of litter. Contrary to expectations we did
not find a difference in the negative effect on diversity between
the two species. This may be due to the tall (2ñ3 m) dense stands
that loosestrife produces where light reaching the substrate is
reduced to a similar level as that under a layer of canary grass
litter. However, although the per capita effects (E) are similar,
the overall impact of canary grass is probably greater than that of
purple loosestrife in the Pacific Northwest. Prior studies indicate
that reed canary grass is more abundant (A) and more widely
distributed (D) than purple loosestrife in wetlands in our area
(Magee et al., 1999; Magee & Kentula, 2005), which suggests that
it is currently exerting a greater negative impact on biotic diversity
than is purple loosestrife.
The distributions of purple loosestrife and reed canary grass
overlap across much of temperate North America. They often
coexist in wetlands, but we found that their abundances are negatively
correlated. This suggests that (1) the two species are competing
with each other, or (2) the two species respond in opposite
ways to other environmental variables. Removing one will likely
result in the increase of the other, and controlling one without
controlling the other is unlikely to lead to an increase in diversity.
A prior investigation of the effect of biological agents introduced
for purple loosestrife control found that, although loosestrife
abundance was reduced by 90%, plant diversity did not increase
in the presence of high density stands of reed canary grass
(Schooler, 1998). In addition, Morrison (2002) found that reed
canary grass increased in study plots where loosestrife was
removed, which may be why she did not detect an increase of
diversity with decreased loosestrife abundance. The replacement
of one weed by another that is even harder to control is an example
of a revenge effect: in our rush to solve local and acute pest
problems we may be creating diffuse and chronic problems that
are even harder to solve (Tenner, 1996; McEvoy & Coombs,
2000).
Our review of prior studies revealed sampling issues may have
contributed to the inconsistent results on the environmental
consequences of purple loosestrife invasion. We suggest future
studies measuring biotic diversity need to address the five following
issues. First, examination of diversity should include multiple
measures to assess whether description of the results changes
with the particular measure used. Second, studies should sample
at a number of scales to determine how effect changes across
scales. Third, adequacy of sampling effort needs to be examined
using species area curves. Fourth, studies should account for the
effects of environmental variables known to influence diversity.
Finally, since purposefully infesting large areas and monitoring
the outcome is not usually an option when studying invasive
organisms, large-scale horizontal observational studies must be
complemented by necessarily small-scale experimental studies to
establish cause and effect relationships. Experiments might
establish whether invaders potentially decrease diversity; observational
studies might establish when, where and how strongly
invaders actually decrease diversity. This information strengthens
the conclusion that low diversity is a consequence of higher
invader abundance rather than high invader abundance results
from low diversity (Elton, 1958; Espinosa-GarcÌa et al., 2004;
Zavaleta & Hulvey, 2004). Another method to determine cause
and effect is through vertical field studies that track relationships
among invasive species and biotic diversity over time at randomly
selected sites while manipulating abundance of the invasive species.
However, these studies are difficult to implement because
selectively manipulating abundance of the invasive species across
large spatial scales is difficult to accomplish. Classical biological
control can be an effective means to selectively reduce populations
of invasive plants (Landis et al., 2003), but documenting
negative effects should occur before the importation of potentially
risky biological control agents (Hager & McCoy, 1998). It is
difficult to establish causal relationships when examining the
effects of invasive plants on biotic diversity. A robust assessment of
effect requires evidence from both experimental and observational
studies.
One difficulty of an observational study is determining cause
and effect relationships. Underlying environmental variables,
correlated with the abundance of the invasive species, may be
responsible for the observed variation in plant diversity. To
strengthen our conclusions, we measured alternative environmental
variables likely to cause variation in plant diversity. We
conclude that the variables of interest, purple loosestrife and reed
canary grass abundance, are not correlated with various measures
of topography, hydrology and soil properties. Therefore,
patterns of plant species richness and abundance that are correlated
with invasive species abundance are likely a result of the effect of the invasive species and not the underlying environment.
In addition, experimental studies document the ability of both
invaders to decrease plant diversity (Weiher et al., 1996; Green &
Galatowitsch, 2002; Kercher & Zedler, 2004). The combination
of this evidence strongly suggests that both purple loosestrife and
reed canary grass are reducing the plant community diversity of
wetlands in the Pacific Northwest USA.