xabstract


Native consumers play a vital role in maintaining

ecosystem functioning, but species invasion may

alter these processes. We hypothesized that the individual

effects of large-bodied native and invasive consumers on

ecosystem functioning and invertebrate community

assemblages differ from the interactive effects. In the San

Marcos River (Texas, USA), big claw river shrimp (Macrobrachium

carcinus, Decapoda: Palemoides) is a largebodied

native freshwater shrimp species with low abundance,

and armored catfish (Hypostomus plecostomus,

Loricariidae) is an abundant, large-bodied invasive species.

To examine natural distribution of these consumers, we

conducted repeated field surveys of the river. Catfish had a

wide range of distribution with high densities in the river,

while shrimp with low densities had a patchy distribution

in the open areas adjacent to openings and crevices. To

investigate their individual and interactive effects, we

performed a 2 9 2 factorial mesocosm stream channel

experiment cross-classifying the presence and absence of

catfish and shrimp for assessing their effects on ecosystem

engineering and ecosystem functioning. Presence of invasive

catfishes in mesocosms showed a significant influence

on ecosystem functioning by decreasing periphyton biomass,

altering periphyton nutrient ratios, and facilitating

detrital decomposition. Catfish presence altered invertebrate

community composition in leaf packs and produced

ecosystem engineering effects by altering benthic habitat.

The native big claw river shrimp had little effect on ecosystem

functioning in mesocosms, but its presence

appeared to mitigate the effects of catfish on periphyton

and sediments. Our results suggest that native consumers

can have the ability to mitigate the effects of invasive taxa,

thus conservation of native species is critical to the preservation

of ecosystem functioning in stream ecosystems. xintroduction


Ecosystem functioning is linked to community composition

and the functional roles of taxa (Covich et al. 2004;

Zhang et al. 2004). Organisms which modify habitat

structure and affect resource availability through mechanical

and physiochemical alteration of resource materials

and/or habitats are referred to as allogenic ecosystem

engineers (Jones et al. 1994; Gutierrez and Jones 2006). In

many ecosystems, native taxa often function as ecosystem

engineers, playing critical roles influencing ecosystem

functioning such as production, decomposition, and nutrient

cycling (Webster and Benfield 1986; Vanni et al. 1997;

McIntyre et al. 2007). Invasive species, often in competition

with native species (Olsson et al. 2009), also alter

ecosystem properties and habitat characteristics (Vitousek

1990; Parker et al. 1999; Crooks 2002; Atkinson et al.

2010). The individual effects of native and non-native

ecosystem engineers on resource availability and ecosystem

functioning have been widely investigated (Moore

2006), but relatively few studies have investigated interactions

between native and invasive ecosystem engineers coexisting in the same ecosystems (but see Berkenbusch

et al. 2007; Gribben et al. 2009). Thus, it is unclear how

effects of native and invasive ecosystem engineers may be

altered by each other.

Riverine ecosystems often support diverse assemblages

of native organisms (Malmqvist 2002). However, populations

of native taxa are declining from multiple anthropogenic

disturbances (Dudgeon et al. 2006), including the

establishment of invasive species (Lodge et al. 1998;

Mooney and Hobbs 2000). Spring-fed river ecosystems

are particularly relevant systems to examine the individual

and interactive effects of native and invasive species on

ecosystem functioning because hydrological and physiochemical

constancy of these systems has led to the

evolution of endemic spring-adapted taxa with limited

geographic ranges (Hubbs 1995). This constancy in physiochemical

conditions also makes spring-fed ecosystems

highly susceptible to invasion by non-native taxa (Moyle

and Light 1996).

Here, we present a study examining a native and an

invasive species in the spring-fed San Marcos River

(Texas, USA): the native big claw river shrimp (Macrobrachium

carcinus, Decapoda: Palemoides; hereafter

referred to as shrimp) and the invasive suckermouth catfish

(Hypostomus plecostomus, Loricariidae; hereafter referred

to as catfish or armored catfish). Big claw river shrimp are

amphidromous and widely distributed throughout the

Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico, in which the northern

end of their geographic range is in the San Marcos River

(Bowles et al. 2000). Shrimp populations in the upper San

Marcos River currently exhibit low densities, but these

arthropods historically exhibited high abundances in the

river (Bowles et al. 2000). Shrimp migrate over 320 km

and cross multiple low-head dams ranging from approximately

1ñ4 m in height to reach the headwaters of the San

Marcos River. Armored catfish, native to South America,

have been introduced via the aquarium trade into subtropical

and spring-fed ecosystems across North America

(Nico and Martin 2001) and have been in the San Marcos

River since the late 1990s (Perkin et al. 2010). Previous

studies have compared the impacts of stream grazing fishes

and macroarthropods relating to consumer biomass or

identity (Bengston et al. 2008; Ludlam and Magoulick

2010), but this study examined the individual and combined

effects of these consumers on stream ecosystem

processes.

Macroarthropods play important roles in nutrient

cycling, sediment transport, and organic matter processing

in streams (Covich et al. 2004). Big claw river shrimp are

large-bodied (up to 1 kg wet weight) omnivores (Bowles

et al. 2000), which eat small fish, leaf litter, mollusks, and

invertebrates (Crowl et al. 2001), and can be top predators

in some streams (Covich et al. 1996). Loricariid catfishes

are efficient algivores and can increase sediment transport

and turbidity through foraging and burrowing activities

(Power 1984). Catfishes have relatively high body P content

(high %P by mass) due to their bony armor plates

containing CañPO4, and their growth can be P-limited

when P is low in algae (Hood et al. 2005). Catfishes consuming

algae with C:P ratios higher than their body C:P

(e.g., a stoichiometrically imbalanced diet)can affect

nutrient cycling, resource availability and quality (Sterner

and Elser 2002; Knoll et al. 2009). Although catfish and

shrimp have the potential to affect community and ecosystem

functioning, the degree of diet overlap between big

claw shrimp and armored catfish is likely to be limited.

We had two goals in this study: (1) examine the distribution

of invasive armored catfish and native big claw river

shrimp in the upper San Marcos River, and (2) examine the

effects of catfish and shrimp on ecosystem functioning and

benthic communities in stream mesocosms. We predicted

that catfish are abundant and widespread distributed

throughout the upper San Marcos River and that shrimp are

relatively rare and exhibit a more patchy distribution. We

tested the hypothesis that native and non-native consumers

differently influence ecosystem functioning and invertebrate

community composition and that the effect of each

consumer will be modified by the other consumer species.

We predicted that herbivorous catfish will reduce periphyton

biomass, increase sediment transport and alter

periphyton nutrient ratios (i.e., algal C:P and N:P). Specifically,

we predicted that (1) catfish presence will lead to

a depletion of P in periphyton (e.g., higher algal C:P and

N:P) due to their low mass-specific P excretion rates; (2)

shrimp presence will increase leaf litter decomposition,

sediment transport, and alter invertebrate community

composition; and (3) shrimp presence will mitigate the

effects of catfish on ecosystem function and nutrient

dynamics through antagonistic interactions and interference

associated with its predatory tendencies. xmethods

The San Marcos River is located along the Balcones

Escarpment in central Texas, USA and is characterized by

clear water, abundant macrophytes, and little temporal

variation in temperature (*22 C), flow, and water quality

(Groeger et al. 1997). Like many spring-fed river systems

in the western US, the San Marcos River is habitat for

multiple endemic and endangered species (USFWS 1996;

Bowles et al. 2000). Water from the Edwards Aquifer

emerges in a small wetland area (Spring Lake) and subsequently

creates the upper San Marcos River. Water in the upper portion of the river is relatively elevated in N, almost

exclusively in the form of NO3

2-, with concentrations

*1,600 lg/L. In contrast, total P concentrations are much

lower with PO4

3- being the dominant form; PO4

3- ranges

from 10 to 30 lg/L. TN:TP ratios (*220:1 by moles) and

bioassays suggest that river algal communities are P-limited

(Groeger et al. 1997). Monthly nighttime snorkel surveys were performed to

determine and quantify longitudinal patterns of shrimp and

catfish populations at two sites in the upper spring-influenced

portion of the river. Preliminary observations

indicated that both species were most active at night and

that densities and behavioral differences between the two

species necessitated different survey methods. Catfish

surveys were determined with snorkel survey counts using

dive lights, by swimming five cross-river transects at two

sites in the upper San Marcos River. The upstream site was

located just below the river headwaters and the downstream

site was located approximately 1.2 km downsteam.

On each count occasion, five divers swam along each

transect at a reach and counted catfish within a 1 m area

along each transect line. Catfish were grouped into three

size classes:\10 cm total length (TL), 10ñ40 cm TL, and

[40 cm TL. Catfish surveys were conducted monthly from

May to October 2008, and from April to May 2009.

Shrimp are rare in the river and often observed in rocky

crevices, but occasionally observed in the main channel. In

addition, shrimp were frequently observed under the full

moon, which is consistent to the movement pattern of other

freshwater migratory macroarthropods (Kikkert et al.

2009). Due to low densities of shrimp, we did not limit our

searches to 50-m reaches within each site, but instead

performed counts of all shrimp observed in each larger

section of the river. Searches were performed on a monthly

basis from April to November 2008 and from April to July

2009, typically on nights of or within 1ñ2 days of the full

moon. Snorkelers divided the search area into approximately

equal sections and searched the open channel, all

openings and crevices, and macrophyte stands with dive

lights for shrimp. Counts at a site typically lasted for 1ñ2 h.

Shrimp were enumerated and categorized as adult

([13 cm) or juvenile (\13 cm). We investigated the effects of shrimp and catfish in a

replicated stream-channel experiment, which consisted of a

2 9 2 factorial design in which the presence and absence

of shrimp was cross-classified with the presence and

absence of armored catfish. The design consisted of the

following treatment combinations: a control (catfish absent

and shrimp absent; -C, -S), catfish present (catfish present

and shrimp absent; ?C, -S), shrimp present (catfish

absent and shrimp present; -C, ?S), and catfish and

shrimp present (?C, ?S). Shrimp presence treatments

consisted of one shrimp and catfish presence treatments

consisted of two catfish. Due to the low densities of shrimp

and its conservation status (e.g., high priority status by the

Texas Parks and Wildlife Comprehensive Wildlife Conservation

Strategy), we limited the number of replicates of

each treatment to four. Experimental mesocosms, such as

artificial stream channels are frequently used and appropriate

model systems for the examination of ecological

interactions, but some community diversity and environmental

heterogeneity are sacrificed with their use (Drenner

and Mazumder 1999).

Sixteen stream channels were created by modifying eight

existing concrete raceways located in a covered outdoor

facility, which were divided in half with a PVC-plastic mesh

frame which was fully lined with 6-mil black polyethylene.

Each original raceway had a single valve that discharged

water into it; in order to ensure equal flow from the single

valve to each of the two stream channels within each raceway,

we created a single PVC and plastic reservoir that

discharged equal amounts of water over a small spillway into

each stream channel. Water feeding stream channels came

from an outdoor artesian well from the Edwards Aquifer,

providing stream channels the same water as the San Marcos

River. Water inflow rates to channels were sufficient to

create a residence time of *10 min. Channel dimensions

were 4.0 9 0.3 9 0.3 m (l 9 w 9 d). The ends and tops of

all channels were fenced off with 3-cm aperture mesh to

prevent escape of shrimp or catfish. Forty-watt full-spectrum

florescent lights were hung *70 cm above each channel in

an orientation parallel to flow. Lights were kept on a 16/8 h

light/dark cycle, with mean light intensity of *100 lmol/

m2/s immediately above the water surface (using a Li-Cor 2p

quantum sensor; Li-Cor Environmental, Lincoln, Nebraska,

USA). Light intensity in stream channels were within the

range of intensities observed in closed-canopy sections of the

San Marcos River (W. H. Nowlin, unpublished data). Stream

channel bottoms were covered with sand, gravel, and cobble

(cover = 50 % cobble, 50 % sand and gravel); proportions

are comparable to the upper San Marcos River. One cinderblock

was added to each channel as a refuge site for

shrimp and catfish; cinderblocks were typically occupied

during daytime. Channels were checked daily to note location

and status of catfish and/or shrimp.

Prior to the start of the experiment, periphyton from the

San Marcos River was collected by scrubbing rocks with a

nylon bristle brush into a bucket of river water. Equal

aliquots of this periphyton slurry were added to each

stream channel four times over a 3-week period. The brushed rocks were also added to channels in equal densities

to promote periphyton growth. Macroinvertebrates

collected with a kick net from the upper San Marcos River

were placed into a bucket of river water. One of equal

aliquots from the bucket was added to each channel; three

aliquots were kept to determine baseline densities of

invertebrates added to channels. A multivariate analysis of

variance (MANOVA) was run to determine differences

between subsamples for all weeks and all invertebrate

functional feeding groups (both abundance and richness;

based on Merritt and Cummings 2007), total taxon richness,

total taxon abundance and abundance for each taxon

present. Differences between subsamples were found to be

non-significant (Wilks k = 0.065, F2,24 = 14.72). Because

mesocosm source water was from the underground aquifer

(containing few invertebrates) and macroinvertebrates were

allowed to ëdriftí downstream out of stream channels,

addition of river macroinvertebrates was repeated every

7 days to simulate incoming macroinvertebrate drift. Each

week we added 438 ± 69 invertebrates to each channel.

Invertebrate taxa added to stream channels were reflective

of the community in the river, which was mostly composed

of amphipods, ephemeropterans, dipterans, trichopterans,

and gastropods.

After a 3 week equilibration period, the start of the

experiment was initiated by addition of shrimp and catfish.

Shrimp and catfish were collected from the upper San

Marcos River by hand or dip nets. Shrimp lengths (rostrum

tip to tail) ranged from 19.5 to 25.0 cm (mean ± 1 SE;

20.9 ± 1.9 cm), with wet mass ranging from 126.0 to

299.0 g (184.9 ± 57.8 g). Catfish total lengths (TL) ranged

from 23.0 to 33.0 cm (28.2 ± 3.6 cm), and individual wet

mass ranged from 130.0 to 382.0 g (250.1 ± 90.9 g).

Observations of shrimp and catfish indicated that they had

adequate room to move about stream channels. After the

experiment, all shrimp were released back into the San

Marcos River, with the exception of one shrimp (from one

of the shrimp only treatments) which died on day 15 of the

experiment. We chose not to replace this individual

because of the shrimpís conservation status and instead

removed that stream channel data from analyses. The

experiment began on August 24, 2007 and ran for 28 days.

Previous work in tropical systems indicated that big

claw river shrimp are omnivorous (Crowl et al. 2001).

However, shrimp in the San Marcos River occupy a fairly

high trophic position (trophic level *4, with algae occupying

trophic level 1; Pound et al. 2011) and have been

observed eating live and dead fish. Thus, to ensure that the

shrimp in our stream channels occupied a similar trophic

role as in the San Marcos River, we added one small dead

fish (Lepomis spp. 70ñ120 mm TL) to each stream channel

once per week, as a potential food source. Fish were added

to all channels each week to prevent differences associated

with addition of fish. Fish were collected from the San

Marcos River with nets, pithed, submerged, and weighted

down within the stream channel to allow shrimp access.

Remaining fish material was removed from each stream

channel after a 24-h period and weighed (wet mass) and

measured to determine the amount consumed. Fish in

channels containing shrimp were entirely consumed in all

but four instances; each instance involved a different

shrimp.

To assess ecosystem responses to shrimp and catfish, we

measured periphyton biomass, sediment and organic matter

transport and accumulation, periphyton nutrient ratios, and

organic matter decomposition. All ecosystem response

variables were measured on days 14 and 28. To estimate

periphyton biomass and the amount of organic and inorganic

matter on surfaces, four ceramic tiles (16.2 9 16.2 cm)

were placed in the downstream section of each stream

channel. Two tiles were enclosed within a 2-cm aperture

wire cage and two were open to direct activities of shrimp

and catfish. All tiles were placed in channels 3 weeks before

the experiment was started. One ëcagedí and one ëuncagedí

tile was removed from each stream channel on each sampling

date. Upon being pulled from a stream channel, the

upper surfaces of tiles were cleaned with a soft bristled nylon

brush and rinsed into an acid-washed HDPE beaker with

Milli-Q water. Chlorophyll a, organic matter (OM), inorganic

matter (IM), and C, N and P content of materials on

tiles were determined from this slurry.Aportion of the slurry

was filtered onto a Pall A/E filter and filters were frozen at -

4 C. Chla was extracted using 99 % HPLC grade acetone

for 4 h in the dark and measured on a Turner TrilogyTM Lab

Fluorometer (Turner Designs Inc., Sunnyvale California).

OM and IM mass on tiles (mg OM or IM/cm2) were determined

by filtration onto pre-weighed Pall A/E filters and

determination of dry mass before and after ignition at

450 C for 4 h. To estimate C and N content of periphyton

(mg nutrient/cm2), tile material was filtered onto pre-ashed

Whatman GF/F filters (nominal pore size 0.7 lm), dried at

60 C for 48 h, and analyzed on a CE Elantech Carbonñ

Nitrogen analyzer. We did not remove or correct for inorganic

C on filters used in analyses; thus, values of C content

of filters include some inorganic C. In order to measure P

content of periphyton (mg P/cm2), materials on tiles were

filtered onto Whatman GF/F filters, digested with HCl at

100 C, and measured as PO4

3- using the molybdenum blue

method (Wetzel and Likens 2000).

To assess sediment downstream movement and accumulation,

sediment traps were placed mid-channel and

allowed to collect sediments (Statzner and Peltret 2006).

Sediment traps consisted of shallow plastic trays

(12.7 9 12.7 cm); two sediment traps were placed mid

channel 2.3 m from the downstream end of the channel.

One sediment trap was pulled from each stream channel on each sampling date. Each sediment trap was washed with

DI water into an aluminum weigh boat and contents were

allowed to dry at 60 C for 48 h. Dry mass (g) was measured.

Samples were homogenized, ashed at 500 C for

4 h, and IM was determined by difference. Accumulation

of IM was expressed as mg in trays on each sampling date

(days 14 and 28).

We quantified organic matter decomposition by measuring

leaf litter mass loss. Four pre-weighed dry leaf

packs, each containing 10 leaves of Texas Oak (Querqus

texana), a common riparian tree species, were placed in

each stream channel. Two leaf packs were enclosed within

bags consisting of 3-cm aperture plastic mesh, and two

were left open. Leaves were enclosed in mesh bags of this

aperture size in order to substantially reduce the direct

access of shrimp and catfish to leaves while still allowing

other macroinvertebrates and microbes access to them.

Leaves were tied together with monofilament fishing line

around the petioles and weighted with metal washers to

ensure submersion. One ëbaggedí and one ëunbaggedí leaf

pack were removed on each sampling date. Leaf packs

were subsequently washed with DI water to remove

organic matter and organisms and were dried for 48 h at

60 C. Leaf litter dry mass (g) was determined for calculating

decomposition rate as percent change in mass over

the period each pack was in a channel.

At the end of the experiment, we examined nutrient

recycling by catfish and shrimp by estimating nutrient

excretion. Each shrimp or catfish from channels was

quantified for excretion rates of NñNH4

? and PñPO4

3-.

Live organisms were placed in filtered (Pall A/E) stream

water in acid-washed plastic tubs and allowed to excrete

for *1 h (Mather et al. 1995; Schaus et al. 1997; Higgins

et al. 2006). Organismís N and P excretion were measured

as NH4

? and PO4

3- accumulation over the time interval.

Ammonium was analyzed with the phenate method (Solorzano

1969) and PO4

3- with the molybdenum blue

method (Wetzel and Likens 2000).

To investigate effects of shrimp and catfish on benthic

community, we examined invertebrates in unbagged leaf

packs and in the benthos of stream channels. We chose to

analyze only invertebrate communities with which catfish

and shrimp had direct contact. When leaf packs were

removed on each sampling date (days 14 and 28), invertebrates

were removed by rinsing with DI water and

picking with forceps and preserved in 95 % EtOH. To

assess the influence of shrimp and catfish on benthic

invertebrate communities, two basket samplers were placed

within the substrate at the end of each stream channel prior

to the start of the experiment. Basket samplers were constructed

with 15.2 cm diameter, 3.8 cm depth plastic

baskets filled with cleaned river cobble and gravel. Basket

samplers were buried in stream channel substrate with the

upper lip of the basket flush with the benthic surface. On

days 14 and 28, one basket sampler was collected from

each stream channel. Invertebrates from leaf packs and

basket samplers were identified to the lowest necessary

taxonomic group (Thorp and Covich 2001; Merritt and

Cummings 2007). For the field survey portion of the study, difference in the

abundance of catfish between upstream and downstream

sites was assessed with repeated-measures ANOVA. The

mean of densities of transect counts at each site on each

sampling date (8 dates total) were compared between the

upstream and downstream site, with site serving as the

independent (categorical) variable, total catfish density

(number/m2) as the dependent variable, and sampling date

as the repeated measure. The GreenhouseñGeisser correction

was applied if the assumption of sphericity was not

met. Due to low shrimp densities and the count method we

used, we did not compare shrimp numbers between sites

using statistics. To calculate density of shrimp at the two

sites, we utilized ArcGIS 10 (ESRI, Inc., Redlands, California)

to calculate the surface area (m2) of the surveyed

upstream and downstream sites.

In the stream channel experiment, we examined the

main and interactive effects of shrimp and catfish on

periphyton biomass, OM and IM on tiles, and periphyton

nutrient ratios (molar C:N, C:P, and N:P) by calculating the

mean of each response variable across both sampling dates

and analyzing with two-way analysis of variance

(ANOVA) for cross-classified factors. We utilized the

mean of the two sampling dates of these response variables

in analyses because the experimental period was relatively

short (28 days), treatment effects were apparent by the first

sampling date (14 days after start of the experiment), and

we were more interested in examining the overall effect of

treatments on this set of response variables rather than how

effects might vary in a relatively short time period. For this

set of analyses, the main effects are the independent effect

of each factor (catfish or shrimp) and the interaction effect

is the amount of measured variation in the response variable

due to the interdependence of catfish and shrimp. All

invertebrate community response variables (invertebrates

in unbagged leaf packs and in basket samplers) were analyzed

for total invertebrate abundance, taxon abundance,

taxon richness, abundance of the various functional feeding

groups, and taxonomic richness of the various functional

feeding groups. Again, means were taken across both dates

for each response variable and analyzed with two-way

ANOVA. In the case of response variables where time is

clearly a factor (sediment and organic matter accumulation

in sediment traps and mass loss of leaf litter), we performed a two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)

using sampling date as the covariate. This approach

allowed us to account for the variance in sediment accumulation

and leaf litter mass loss associated with time and

to examine the main and interaction effects of shrimp and

catfish. Due to the uneven number of replicates in each

treatment combination, Type III sums of squares were used

in all ANOVAs. Data not meeting assumptions of normality

and homoscedasticity were log10 transformed. If a

significant catfish 9 shrimp interaction was detected, we

performed an analysis of simple effects with Tukey HSD

tests to determine how the effects of each treatment may

differ in the presence and absence of the other treatment.

Although the experiment initially had four replicates of

each treatment, we were forced to omit two stream channels

from analyses. One replicate of the ëonly shrimp presentí

(-C, ?S) treatment was omitted because the shrimp died

(see above) and we omitted one replicate of the control

treatment (-C,-S) because a shrimp in an adjacent channel

crawled over the dividing fence and was in the control

channel for*24 h before it was removed and placed back in

its original channel. The shrimp in the control stream channel

produced a noticeable effect in this short amount of time;

thus, we elected to omit this channel from analyses. For all

analyses, we set a at 0.05, and all data were analyzed with

SPSS 15.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc.).

xresults


Catfish densities in the San Marcos River exhibited substantial

spatial variation. The upstream site had significantly

higher (0.49 individuals/m2) catfish densities than the

downstream site (0.22 individuals/m2), and catfish densities

at both sites were lower in early summer and increased as

summer progressed, but this seasonal variation was not significant

(two-way repeated measures ANOVA, site:

F1,4 = 10.59, P\0.05; time: F7,4 = 3.37, P[0.05; site 9

time: F7,4 = 2.19, P[0.05) (Fig. 1a, b). The upstream site

had more even proportions of the three catfish size classes in

the population, with small (\10 cm), medium (10ñ40 cm)

and large ([40 cm) individuals composing approximately

28, 49 and 23 % of the individuals throughout the period of

observation (Fig. 1a). In contrast, the downstream site had

fewer large individuals in the population (approximately

6 % of the population) (Fig. 1b).

Shrimp were less abundant than catfish in the San

Marcos River (Fig. 1c, d) and were virtually non-existent

in the upstream site (0.0001 individuals/m2; Fig. 1c). In the

downstream site, both large ([13 cm length) and small

(\13 cm) individuals were observed, resulting in 5ñ12

total individuals being observed at the downstream site on

each count night (0.0031 individuals/m2 in 2009; Fig. 1d).

Shrimp distribution was patchy within each site and the

shrimp were often observed in the open but in areas adjacent

to openings and crevices.

Catfish caused a significant reduction in periphyton

biomass (Chla) on uncaged tiles, whereas shrimp had

little effect on periphyton biomass on uncaged tiles

(Fig. 2a; Table 1). There was a marginally non-significant

(P = 0.052) catfish 9 shrimp interaction indicating interdependence

between the effects of catfish and shrimp on

periphyton Chla on uncaged tiles. Analysis of simple

effects indicated that catfish led to a significant reduction in

Chla when shrimp absent (comparison of -C, -S and ?C,

-S treatments: P\0.001), but the effect of catfish on

Chla was not detected when shrimp were present (comparison

of -C, ?S to ?C, ?S: P = 0.148). In contrast,

catfish did not modify the effects of shrimp on periphyton

(comparison of -C, -S and -C, ?S: P = 0.188; comparison

of ?C, -S and ?C, ?S: P = 0.188). Neither

catfish or shrimp had a significant effect on periphyton of

caged tiles (Table 1; Fig. 2b).

The presence of both catfish and shrimp reduced the

amount of organic matter and inorganic matter on uncaged

tiles (Table 1; Fig. 2c, e). There was a significant catfish

and shrimp interaction for these two response variables

(Table 1). Analyses of simple effects indicated that catfish

led to a significant reduction in IM and OM on uncaged

tiles when shrimp were not present (-C, -S vs. ?C, -S:

P\0.001 for both response variables), but these effects

were not detected when shrimp were present (-C, ?S vs.

?C, ?S: P C 0.940 for both variables) (Fig. 2c, e). In turn,

catfish modified the effects of shrimp on IM (-C, -S vs.

-C, ?S: P = 0.006; -C, -S vs. -C, ?S: P = 0.318), but

catfish did not alter the effects of shrimp on uncaged tile

OM (-C, -S vs. -C, ?S: P = 0.199; -C, -S vs. ?C,

?S: P = 0.310). Catfish or shrimp did not affect OM and

IM on caged tiles (Fig. 2d, f).

Catfish significantly reduced periphyton C:N, C:P, and

N:P on uncaged tiles, whereas shrimp had no effect on

those nutrient ratios on uncaged tiles (Fig. 3a, c, e;

Table 1). A significant catfish 9 shrimp interaction effect

was detected for uncaged tile periphyton C:P and N:P.

Catfish led to a significant reduction in C:P and N:P when

shrimp were absent (-C, -S vs. ?C, -S: P B 0.002 for

both ratios), but these effects were not apparent when

shrimp were present (-C, ?S vs. ?C, ?S: P C 0.869 for

both ratios). Similarly, catfish modified the effects of

shrimp on C:P and N:P of open tiles (-C, -S vs. -C, ?S: P\0.020 for both ratios; -C, -S vs. ?C, ?S: P C 0.343

for both ratios). Catfish and shrimp had no effect on

periphyton C:N, C:P, and N:P on caged tiles (Fig. 3b, d, f;

Table 1).

Over the experimental period, there was a downstream

accumulation of total and inorganic sediments in stream

channels and catfish significantly increased this downstream

accumulation (ANCOVA; total sediment: time:

Ptime = 0.0001, catfish: Pcatfish = 0.005; inorganic sediment:

Ptime = 0.004, Pcatfish = 0.013) (Table 2). By the

end of the experiment, treatments containing catfish accumulated

at least two times more sediment as treatments

without catfish (Fig. 4a, b; Table 2). Shrimp did not have a

significant effect on downstream transport of sediments

(P[0.05 for total sediment and inorganic sediments).

Leaf litter lost mass in both bagged and unbagged leaf

packs over the experimental period (Ptime\0.001 for

bagged and unbagged leaf packs) (Table 2; Fig. 4c). Catfish

led to faster mass loss of open leaf packs (P = 0.016),

but had no effect on decomposition of bagged leaf packs

(P = 0.616, Table 2; Fig. 4d). In contrast to predictions,

shrimp did not have a significant effect on leaf litter mass

loss of both bagged and unbagged leaf packs (Table 2).

Dominant taxonomic groups found in unbagged leaf

packs consisted of amphipods, gastropods, ostracods,

ephemeropterans, and trichopterans. Catfish elicited a significant

reduction in collector-gatherer abundance in

unbagged leaf packs (Table 3). Although catfish and

shrimp did not exhibit significant main effects on scraper

taxon richness in leaf packs, a significant catfish 9 shrimp

interaction was detected for this response variable. However,

analysis of simple effects indicated that the effects of

catfish and shrimp did not differ in the presence of each

other (P C 0.054). There was no significant effect of catfish

or shrimp on the abundance or richness of all other

taxonomic or functional feeding groups (Fig. 5a; Table 3).

Basket samplers contained relatively low densities of

invertebrates (Fig. 5b) and dominant taxa were chironomids,

amphipods, and ostracods. Across treatments, the

mean number of invertebrates per basket was 4.8 ± 0.8

individuals. We did not detect a significant treatment effect

on abundance and richness of total invertebrates and virtually

all functional feeding groups and taxonomic

groupings; however, catfish led to a significant reduction in

the abundance of ostracods (Table 3). However, ostracod

densities were low in all treatments (0ñ2 individuals per basket sampler), thus we view this significant result with

caution.

At the end of the experiment, we determined nutrient

excretion rates of catfish and shrimp to examine differences in

nutrient recycling by these two consumers.We first examined

whether P andN excretion by both catfish and shrimp differed

among treatments. We found no significant difference (onewayANOVA)

inmass-specificNand P excretion rates and the

N:P of excreted nutrients of catfish when by themselves or in

the presence of shrimp (N: F1,7 = 0.675, P = 0.443; P:

F1,7 = 0.477, P = 0.516; N:P: F1,7 = 0.060, P = 0.815),

nor did we detect a significant difference in N and P excretion

of shrimp when catfish were present and absent (N:

F1,4 = 0.499, P = 0.513; P: F1,4 = 0.196, P = 0.688; N:P:

F1,4 = 1.07, P = 0.377). Thus, we compared N and P

excretion of catfish and shrimp by pooling data from catfish

from across treatments and pooling data from shrimp across

all treatments. Shrimp exhibited significantly higher massspecificNexcretion

rates (F1,10 = 17.5,P\0.001) (Fig. 6a);

however, due to high variability in P excretion, we did not

detect a significant difference between catfish and shrimp in

mass-specific P excretion rates or the N:P of nutrients excreted

(P: F1,10 = 0.22, P = 0.65; N:P: F1,10 = 2.3, P = 0.15)

(Fig. 6b, c). xdiscussion
Invasive armored catfish were abundant in the San Marcos

River and affected ecosystem functioning in mesocosm

stream channels. In the experiment, catfish significantly

reduced periphyton biomass, OM and IM on uncaged tiles,

and increased the downstream transport of sediments. In

the absence of catfish, OM, IM, and Chla on uncaged tiles

was on average 4ñ5 times higher than when catfish were

present. In addition, catfish increased leaf litter decomposition

rates and altered periphyton nutrient ratios, but had

relatively minor effects on invertebrate community structure.

In contrast, the presence of native shrimp had little

effect on ecosystem functioning and invertebrate community

structure. Our results indicate that armored catfish can

act as allogenic ecosystem engineers in the San Marcos

River through mechanical modification of benthic habitat

(i.e., redistribution and transport of sediments) and alteration

of resource availability (i.e., periphyton biomass,

periphyton nutrient content, OM availability) (Jones et al.

1994). Results also indicate that native shrimp can mitigate

effects of invasive catfishes, potentially lessening their

impacts on ecosystem functioning.

It is likely that catfish removed periphyton and sediments

from uncaged tiles through movement and foraging.

Grazing by herbivorous fishes can affect multiple structural

and functional properties of stream ecosystems, including

periphyton biomass, periphyton height and composition,

primary productivity, and nutrient dynamics (Flecker 1996;

Flecker et al. 2002; Evans-White et al. 2003; Taylor et al.

2006). Our study found that catfish substantially reduced

periphyton biomass on uncaged tiles. In addition, catfish

increased leaf litter decomposition in unbagged leaf packs,

presumably through increasing litter fragmentation and

mass loss. Bertrand and Gido (2007) similarly found that

herbivorous Phoxinus minnows decreased the size of

benthic particulate organic matter (POM) in stream ecosystems.

In the current study, the observed increase in leaf

litter decomposition in the presence of catfish may be due

to several possible, but not mutually exclusive mechanisms.

First, increased rates of decomposition may be due

to catfish directly grazing biofilms on leaf litter. Biofilms

grow on leaf litter during decomposition (Webster and

Benfield 1986) and grazing of these biofilms can facilitate

fragmentation. Second, armored catfish graze benthic surfaces

and swim close to the benthos (Power 1984; Power

et al. 1989). Thus, incidental contact and fragmentation of

leaf litter through their movements may have also

increased decomposition. In contrast to their impact on

ecosystem functioning, catfish had little effect on invertebrates.

However, catfish led to a decrease in the abundance

of collector-gatherers in unbagged leaf packs. Few studies

have investigated the effects of grazing fish on stream

invertebrate community composition. Bertrand and Gido

(2007) found that herbivorous redbelly dace (Phoxinus

erythrogaster) had no impact on invertebrate community

structure. However, Flecker (1992) found that grazing

tropical fishes reduced abundances of ephemeropterans,

invertebrate collector-gatherers, and chironomids. Rosemond

et al. (1998) observed that presence of consumers

(including fish and shrimp) in a tropical stream decreased

collector-gatherer abundance on leaf packs, but they were unable to determine the individual impacts of each consumer

on invertebrate community structure. In this study,

we observed a decrease in density and diversity of invertebrates

in the presence of catfish, which may be due to

increased disturbance of leaf litter through catfish feeding

and movement.

Catfish affected nutrient dynamics of periphyton by

decreasing C:P and C:N on uncaged tiles. Catfish reduced

C:P three-fold (from *18,000:1 to *3,500:1) and reduced

C:N from nearly 34:1 to approximately 21:1. These

C:nutrient ratios are relatively high (especially in the ëboth

catfish and shrimp absentí treatment) but fall within the

range of C:nutrient ratios reported in the literature (Cross

et al. 2005). A decrease in algal C:nutrient ratios in grazed

periphyton is consistent with meta-analyses which have

indicated that grazing on periphyton tends to decrease

C:nutrient ratios through an increase periphyton N- and

P-content (Hillebrand et al. 2008). Periphyton biofilms

often contain a large detritus component (Frost et al. 2005)

and decreases in grazed periphyton C:nutrient ratios may

be due to non-selective removal of detritus and algae and

subsequent re-growth of relatively more P- and N-rich algae (Hillebrand et al. 2008). Indeed, armored catfish

within the San Marcos River were largely non-selective

grazers whose diets are composed of detritus of algal origin

(Pound et al. 2011). Significantly lower C:P and C:N of

periphyton biofilms in the presence of catfish may also be

due to removal of carbonates and/or inorganic sediments;

water from the San Marcos River comes from a limestone

aquifer and river waters are high in calcium carbonate. As

previously stated, we did not correct periphyton C:nutrient

ratios for inorganic C within periphyton, thus removal of

IM from surfaces may remove a substantial amount of C,

causing a decrease in C:nutrient ratios. In addition, the

relative enrichment of periphyton in N and P in the presence

of catfish grazing may be due to the alteration of

periphyton architecture and composition leading to faster

nutrient uptake rates and enrichment (Burkholder et al.

1990; Hillebrand and Kahlert 2001; Hillebrand et al. 2002).

Finally, excretion of nutrients on surfaces by catfish as they

graze may increase nutrient supply, thereby lowering

periphyton C:nutrient ratios (Hillebrand et al. 2008). All of

these mechanisms may simultaneously act to alter periphyton

C:nutrient ratios in the presence of catfish and we

cannot determine which mechanism(s) were most

important. In addition to the effects of catfish on C:nutrient ratios,

we found that catfish decreased periphyton N:P on uncaged

tiles. Although catfish increased periphyton N and P content

(as indicated by decreased periphyton C:N and C:P),

the observed decrease of periphyton N:P in the presence of

catfish indicates that catfish increased P content of

periphyton more than N content. These findings are in

disagreement with stoichiometric theory, which predicts

that grazers with low body C:P (like loricariid catfishes;

Vanni et al. 2002) would retain P from food, thereby

decreasing availability of P in the environment and causing

depletion of P in primary producers (Sterner 1990; Sterner

and Elser 2002). However, meta-analysis of grazerperiphyton

interactions found that grazers with low body

C:P tended to increase periphyton P content, in apparent

contradiction to stoichiometric predictions (Hillebrand

et al. 2008). This trend may be a consequence of complex

relationships between plasticity in grazer P content, grazer

growth rates, and the relationship between grazer elemental

ratios and physiological demands (Hillebrand et al. 2008).

Periphyton in the San Marcos River are P-limited and

grazing by catfishes may cause changes in periphyton

architecture, turnover, and composition (e.g., Flecker et al.

2002; Hillebrand et al. 2002), leading to increased P uptake

and enrichment. However, we did not assess these aspects

of the periphyton and do not know if this led to the

observed responses.

Grazers in lotic systems often have strong effects on

nutrient cycling (Flecker et al. 2002; Hillebrand et al. 2008;

Knoll et al. 2009). We found that catfish had larger effects

on ecosystem functioning and nutrient cycling at sites

where they had foraging access (i.e., uncaged tiles). Catfish

did not affect periphyton biomass, organic matter, inorganic

matter, or nutrient ratios on caged tiles, as well as

bagged leaf litter decomposition. These results indicate

catfish effects on periphyton had a substantial spatial component and did not propagate outside of locations

where they had direct foraging access. The lack of

observed indirect effects may be due to the short experimental

duration (28 days); indirect nutrient-mediated

effects may require longer transmittance through food

webs and ecosystems (e.g., Arango et al. 2009). In addition,

a lack of wide-spread indirect effects may be because

water residence times in experimental stream channels

were relatively brief. Other studies which have observed

significant, indirect nutrient-mediated effects of fishes were

conducted in systems with longer effective water residence

times, such as pool mesocosms (Knoll et al. 2009) or

experimental streams with recirculating water (Hargrave

2006). Indirect effects of the invasive catfishes on ecosystem

functioning in the San Marcos River may be

evident downstream from the headwater reach where

catfishes are abundant and maintain a high biomass.

In contrast to the effects of catfish, shrimp had little

effect on ecosystem function and invertebrate community

structure. Although there was little direct effect of shrimp

on periphyton biomass, organic and inorganic matter on

uncaged tiles were 1ñ2 times higher than those in the

absence of shrimp. Contrary to our predictions, shrimp did

not affect rates of leaf litter decomposition or invertebrate

communities. These large-bodied shrimp are thought to be

omnivorous and can consume leaf litter (Covich and

McDowell 1996). However, big claw river shrimp in the

San Marcos River exhibit a tendency to be predacious;

stable isotopes indicate that its trophic position is *4 in

this river (Pound et al. 2011). In addition, use of dead fish

to supplement shrimp diets may have dampened their

consumptive effects on leaf litter and invertebrates because

fish resource subsidy throughout the experiment may have

been sufficient to alleviate the need for shrimp to use

detritus or small-bodied invertebrates as food sources.

Dead fish are likely to be less abundant in the San Marcos

River than in the stream channel experiment due to competition with other scavengers (i.e., crayfish) for this

resource. It is possible that when given a choice, fish are a

preferred food source because of its higher quality.

As predicted, a significant catfish 9 shrimp interaction

was detected for a number of response variables, including

periphyton biomass, organic matter and inorganic matter,

and the C:P and N:P of periphyton on uncaged tiles. Shrimp

mitigated or lessened the effects of catfish on all of these

response variables. Similarly, the presence of M. carcinus in

tropical streams slowed litter decomposition rates through

lowering detritivory by other decapods (March et al. 2001).

We hypothesize that the responses observed in our experiment

are due to non-fatal but aggressive behavior by shrimp

limiting catfish foraging time in a particular location. It is

important to note that the sizes of catfish used in this

experiment are commonly found in the upper San Marcos

River and were too large to be consumed by shrimp. Interference

of foraging activities of invasive catfish by shrimp

may be present in the San Marcos River as both consumers

compete for habitat space. However, whether this interaction

occurred and to what extent remains unknown. We additionally

hypothesize that if we had used smaller-sized catfish

in the experiment, shrimp might have caused substantial

catfish mortality and subsequently had a stronger role in

mediating catfish impacts. Inversely, if we had used smallersized

shrimp in the experiment, then shrimp may have little

effect in mediating catfish effects. Our results indicate that the current ecosystem engineering

role of big claw river shrimp in the San Marcos River is

likely minimal. However, big claw river shrimp are largebodied

consumers, can reach relatively high densities, and

can play structuring roles in stream communities (Covich

et al. 1991; Crowl and Covich 1994). Thus, the ecosystem

engineering role of shrimp in the river is likely to be

density dependent. Our field survey data show that shrimp

are currently rare in the San Marcos River; however,

shrimp densities were much higher in the past, to the extent

that populations were commercially harvested (Bowles

et al. 2000). Density of shrimp in our stream channels was

much higher than densities in the San Marcos River and it

is likely we observed the maximum potential effect of

shrimp on ecosystem functioning at relatively small spatial

scales (i.e., at the scale of a few meters). If we were to

calculate shrimp density based upon the local habitat areas

they consistently utilize or occupy, then densities per m2

within the river would be higher than our reach-based

estimates. Although shrimp had little direct effect on lower

trophic levels and ecosystem functioning in this study, their

effects may be most intense at the top of the food web

because they are large-bodied predators (Polis and Strong

1996). Thus, their extirpation from the San Marcos River

might have effects not observed at the scale of this study.

Armored catfish were first reported in the San Marcos

River in the late 1990s (Perkin et al. 2010). Our results

indicate that catfish densities in the upper portion of the

river are on average 0.22ñ0.50 individuals/m2, which were

comparable to the densities used in our experiment

(0.59 individuals/m2). Catfishes currently represent

20ñ50 % of the upper San Marcos River ichthyomass

(Pound et al. 2011). The effects we detected of catfish on

sediment redistribution and transport are consistent with

observations in other systems (Hoover et al. 2006). We

predict that armored catfish with high densities and larger

body size ([40 cm TL) are likely to have strong allogenic

ecosystem engineering impacts in the upper San Marcos

River by affecting habitat structure through sediment

redistribution and resource availability and quality through

alteration of periphyton biomass and stoichiometry.

Invasive species are a major concern for freshwater

conservation and management (Mooney and Hobbs 2000),

causing biodiversity loss, alteration of ecosystem functioning,

and extinction of native taxa (Clavero and Garcia-

Berthou 2005). Riverine ecosystems are facing widespread

extinctions and extirpations of native species (Revenga

et al. 2005; Dudgeon et al. 2006). This study observed that

a native shrimp species facing substantial conservation

concerns had the ability through non-trophic effects to

mitigate some of the impacts of an invasive species on

ecosystems. We also show that a non-native consumer,

which can obtain high densities and biomass and has the

ability to utilize a wide range of habitats, can have strong

impacts on ecosystem functioning.