xabstract
The impact of invasive smallmouth bass, Micropterus dolomieu, on the abundance of two native fish species, Breede River redfin, Pseudobarbus burchelli, and Cape kurper, Sandelia capensis, was investigated in the Witte River tributary of the Breede River in South Africa’s Cape Floristic Region (CFR). Native fish density was estimated in five pools and three riffles both above and below a 2 m-high waterfall that acts as a barrier to M. dolomieu. Both native species were relatively abundant (mean ± S.E. fish/100 m2: 152.10 ± 19.16–10.33 ± 6.06) at sites above the waterfall where M. dolomieu was absent, but absent or scarce (0–0.53 ± 0.38 fish/100 m2) at sites below it with M. dolomieu. There were no significant differ- ences in measured environmental variables between sites above and below the waterfall, and M. dolomieu is thus implicated as the main factor responsible for the differences in native fish densities. These findings highlight the critical role of waterfalls in excluding non-native fishes from native fish refugia in the CFR. Key words: non-native predatory fish, Pseudobarbus burchelli, Sandelia capensis, waterfall barrier.

xintroduction

xmethods

xresults

xdiscussion
The Cape Floristic Region (CFR) at the south- western tip of Africa is a hotspot for freshwater fish endemism (Linder et al. 2010; de Moor & Day 2013). Of the 20 species that have been described, 17 are endemic to the region (Skelton 2001; Chakona & Swartz 2013). Worryingly, nearly all of these endemic species appear in the catego- ries vulnerable, endangered and critically endan- gered of the IUCN Red List (IUCN 2013). Threats include habitat loss and fragmentation, hydrologi- cal alteration, climate change, overfishing and pollution, but perhaps the greatest threat is that posed by introduced predatory fish (Tweddle et al. 2009). The smallmouth bass Micropterus dolomieu (Lacepède, 1802), an aggressive predatory species from North America, is one of the most wide- spread non-native fishes in the CFR (de Moor & Bruton 1988), but its impacts on native fish popula- tions have not been well studied (Ellender & Weyl 2014). Despite a plethora of anecdotal reports of declines and disappearances of native fish popula- tions following M. dolomieu introductions (de Moor & Bruton 1988), quantitative assessments of impacts on native fish populations in the CFR have only been conducted in two rivers; the Rondegat River tributary of the Olifants River (Western Cape) and the Blindekloof River tributary of the Swartkops River (Eastern Cape). In both rivers small-bodied (<150 mm as adults) native fish species were present at sites without M. dolomieu, but were not recorded from invaded sites (Wood- ford et al. 2005; Lowe et al. 2008; Ellender et al. 2011; Weyl et. al. 2013), implying that M. dolomieu deplete native fish populations in these systems. It remains to be ascertained whether there have been similar impacts in other CFR rivers and in the present study we investigate the influence of M. dolomieu on native fish abundance in the Witte River tributary of the Breede River in the CFR.
The Witte River rises in the Limietberg Mountains and flows in a northeasterly direction for 18 km before joining the upper Breede River (Fig. 1). The area experiences a Mediterranean climate with cool, wet winters and warm, dry summers (Steynor et al. 2009). The geology of the catchment is dominated by Table Mountain sandstone (Tankard et al. 1982) and the water in rivers in the area is clear, acidic and oligotrophic (de Moor & Day 2013). Six species of native fish have been recorded in the Witte River, including the Cape galaxias, Galaxias zebratus Castelnau, 1861, the Cape kurper, Sandelia capensis (Cuvier, 1831), the Breede River redfin, Pseudobarbus burchelli Smith, 1841, the giant redfin, P. skeltoni Chakona and Swartz, 2013, the Berg-Breede River whitefish, Barbus andrewi Barnard, 1937 and the longfin eel, Anguilla mossambica Peters, 1852 (Impson & Bok 1997; Chakona & Swartz 2013). Micropterus dolomieu was introduced into the Breede River in 1939, subsequently spreading into the lower reaches of most major tributaries and establishing self-sustaining populations (de Moor & Bruton 1988). It has invaded the Witte River up to a 2 m-high waterfall situated approximately 8 km
upstream of its confluence with the Breede River. More recently, the sharptooth catfish, Clarias gariepinus (Burchell, 1822), has also invaded the lower river (Chakona & Swartz 2013), but this species was not recorded when our study was conducted in 2003. This study was undertaken within the Limietberg Nature Reserve on 1-km reaches of river directly upstream and down- stream of the waterfall, which are considered un- disturbed and in a near-natural state. The impact of M. dolomieu was investigated by comparing the abundances of native fishes above and below the waterfall where other anthropogenic disturbances are unlikely to have affected native fish populations. However, since this study employed a comparative approach, environmental factors other than the presence of M. dolomieu that could potentially influ- ence native fish abundances were also assessed.
The study reaches consisted of alternating pools and riffles, and fish abundance and environmental conditions were assessed in both of these biotopes. Five pools and three riffles, both above and below the waterfall, were randomly selected as sampling
Short communications 279
 sites. In this study, areas of stream where the water surface was broken or rippled (depth usually <0.5 m) were classified as riffles, whilst areas with a smooth surface and minimal visibly-detectable flow (depth usually >0.5 m) were classified as pools. Sampling was conducted between the 1st and the 7th of April 2003. The abundances of each fish species in the pools and riffles were estimated using single-pass snorkel surveys (Thurow 1994). Snorkelling was used because this survey method does not harm fish, and because it is considered to be an appropriate technique in small, clear streams with low conductivity where electrofishing is not very effective (Hankin & Reeves 1988). Because the study stream is relatively small and clear with the bottom visible, a single diver swam, or crawled, through each site in a zigzag pattern in an up- stream direction, and recorded the number of fish of each species seen. At each site, the following environmental parameters were measured: length (cm); width (cm) at three equidistant points along the site; depth, substrate particle size, flow velocity and the presence/absence of woody debris (dead, submerged trees or branches) and aquatic vegeta- tion (living aquatic plants) at 10–15 evenly spaced points along each of the width transects. Depth (cm) was measured by placing a measuring rod vertically on the stream bed at each point and the substrate particle on which the depth rod was placed was measured and assigned to sand (<2 mm), gravel (2–39 mm), cobble (40–699 mm), boulder (>700 mm) and bedrock as described by King & Tharme (1993). Average flow velocity at each point was estimated with a magnetic flow meter. Temperature (accurate to 0.1°C) was measured at three equidistant points along each of the width transects, and a single pH reading (accurate to 0.01 pH units) was taken at a random position at each site.
The density of each fish species at each site was calculated by dividing the number of individuals recorded by an estimate of the wetted area sampled at that site (site length × average site width). The density of each native fish species at the sites above the waterfall was compared with that at the sites below it using Mann-Whitney U tests, since data did not meet assumptions of parametric tests, even after transformation (Zar 1999). Separate analyses were conducted for each biotope. Average width (n = 3), depth (n = 10–15), flow (n = 10–15), temperature (n = 3), and the proportional compo- sition of the five substrate categories, as well as woody debris and aquatic vegetation, were calcu-
lated for each site. All 12 environmental variables were checked for normality using Shapiro-Wilks tests, and percentage sand, gravel, woody debris and aquatic vegetation were arcsin square root transformed to even out their skewed distribu- tions (Quinn & Keough 2002). A principal compo- nents analysis (PCA) ordination was used to summarize and visualize differences in environ- mental conditions between the sampling sites. Two-way crossed permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) with the fixed factors location (above vs below the waterfall) and biotope (pool vs riffle) was then used to ascer- tain whether or not measured environmental conditions differed significantly between sites above and below the waterfall. The main assump- tion of PERMANOVA is that there is no significant difference in dispersion between the groups being compared, and this was evaluated using a permu- tational analysis of multivariate dispersion test (PERMDISP, Anderson et al. 2008). All univariate analyses were carried out with SPSS (v. 20.0, Chicago, IL), and multivariate analyses were performed using PRIMER-E (Clarke & Gorley 2006) with the add-on package PERMANOVA+ (Anderson et al. 2008).
In the PCA ordination, there was a clear separation of pools from riffles along PC 1, with pools gener- ally deep, wide and slow-flowing, while riffles were shallower, narrower and faster-flowing (Fig. 2), and differences in environmental condi- tions between biotopes were significant (two-way PERMANOVA, F = 7.78, P = 0.008). There was no clear separation of the sites above the waterfall from those below it, and differences in environ- mental conditions between the invaded and non- invaded sites were not significant (two-way PER- MANOVA, F = 2.96, P = 0.085). Both P. burchelli and S. capensis were generally abundant at sites above the waterfall and not at sites below it (Table 1). The density (mean ± S.E.) of P. burchelli in pools above the waterfall 152.10 ± 19.16 fish/ 100 m2 was significantly higher than that in pools below it 0.53 ± 0.38 fish/100 m2 (U8 = 0.01, P = 0.008). The density of S. capensis in pools above the waterfall was 22.12 ± 6.89 fish/100 m2 but no S. capensis were recorded in pools below it. In riffles above the waterfall, the densities of P. burchelli and S. capensis were 57.33 ± 38.44 fish/100 m2 and 10.33 ± 6.06 fish/100 m2, respectively, but no fish were recorded in riffles below the waterfall. Statistical tests for P. burchelli in riffles, and S. capensis in pools and riffles, were not conducted since no fish were found below the waterfall in these biotopes. These results imply that M. dolomieu has had a strong, negative impact on the abundance of these native fishes in the Witte River.
These findings are in line with a growing body of evidence indicating that M. dolomieu has a strong, negative impact on native fish populations in CFR streams. Our results corroborate those of Wood- ford et al. (2005) and Weyl et al. (2013), who found that while abundant above a waterfall barrier on the Rondegat River, five small-bodied native fish species, and juveniles of one large-bodied species were absent below it where M. dolomieu had estab- lished. A similar situation exists in the Blindekloof River where, while present at sites without M. dolomieu, three small-bodied native fish species were absent from a site where M. dolomieu was present (Ellender et al. 2011). Furthermore, our results are consistent with studies documenting negative impacts of the closely-related largemouth bass, Micropterus salmoides (Lacepède, 1802), on native fish populations in the CFR (Skelton 1993; Shelton et al. 2008; Ellender et al. 2011). Taken together, the balance of evidence emerging from the CFR indicates that invasions by non-native predatory fish like M. dolomieu and M. salmoides have had severe consequences for the small- bodied endemic fishes that inhabit streams in the region.
It is becoming increasingly clear that physical barriers such as weirs and waterfalls play a pivotal role in curtailing the spread of alien fish through CFR river networks (e.g. Woodford et al. 2005; Lowe et al. 2008; Shelton et al. 2008; Weyl et al. 2013). Conservation authorities in the CFR need to focus efforts on preventing new invasions up- stream of such barriers, especially in rivers like the Witte River which have been identified as fish sanctuaries in the National Freshwater Ecosystem Priority Areas Atlas (Nel et al. 2011). The eradica- tion of alien fishes from the lower Witte River should also be considered once an appropriate barrier has been built. Micropterus dolomieu have recently been successfully eradicated from the lower Rondegat River using the piscicide rote- none, resulting in rapid recolonization of indige- nous fishes (Weyl et al. 2014). Habitat integrity and water quality in the M. dolomieu-infested reach of the lower Witte River appear to be high, and eradi- cation of non-native fishes could allow for the re-introduction of native fishes, including the highly threatened species B. andrewi and P. skeltoni. Finally, it should be noted that the present study suffered from several shortcomings such as a lack of spatial or temporal replication and these results should thus be considered as preliminary. How- ever, the lack of differences in environmental conditions between the sites above and below the waterfall constitutes good evidence that M. dolomieu has largely eliminated small-bodied native fish from the lower Witte River.