xabstract
The introduction of nonnative salmonids in the Southern Hemisphere generally leads to a reduction in invertebrate abundance and changes in assemblage composition. In the Cape Floristic Region of South Africa, introduced rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss is the dominant predator in many headwater streams, where they have replaced small-bodied native fishes such as Breede River redfin Pseudobarbus burchelli. To examine the consequences of this species replacement on food web structure, we used a month-long field experiment to compare the top-down effects of Breede River redfin and rainbow trout on benthic invertebrate assemblages (abundance and composition) and basal resources (periphyton and particulate organic matter) in 1×1.5m of plastic cages. Benthic invertebrate abundance was more strongly depleted in the cages with redfin than in the cages with trout, and redfin and trout had distinct effects on invertebrate assemblage composition. On the other hand, neither redfin nor trout had a significant influence over standing stocks of periphyton or organic matter, implying that their differential effects on benthic invertebrates did not cascade down to the base of the stream food web in our experiment. Gut content analysis showed that aquatic invertebrates contributed more to the diet of redfin, while terrestrial invertebrates contributed more to the diet of trout, which may be responsible for the relatively weak effect of trout on aquatic invertebrates. This pattern contrasts with nonnative salmonid impacts elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere. That trout can strongly alter the structure of benthic invertebrate assemblages, in addition to severely depleting native fish abundance, in Cape Floristic Region headwater streams should be weighed into management decisions, and our findings highlight the need for a detailed understanding of species-specific top-down effects where native predators are replaced by invasive predators.

xintroduction
Nonnative predators can have strong effects on the structure and function of biological communities through a combination of direct and indirect top-down effects (Simon & Townsend 2003). The consequences of a predator introduction for the receiving community will depend upon how the introduced predator changes the predation regime (Schmitz 2008). In situations where native predators are replaced, the degree to which prey assemblages are affected may then depend on how closely the functional role performed by the introduced predator matches that previously performed by the native predator(s) (Chalcraft & Resetarits 2003). An understanding of species-specific top-down effects is therefore necessary for predicting the consequences of predator introductions and critical for managing non- native predator invasions (Benjamin et al. 2011). The rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum 1792) is among the most widely introduced fish in the world (Fausch 2007), having been introduced to at least 97 countries from its native range in Pacific North America and eastern Russia (Crawford & Muir 2008). Rainbow trout are opportunistic predators, and where introduced, they have impacted negatively on native fish populations (e.g. Kitano 2004; Fausch et al. 2010; Young et al. 2010), transformed aquatic invertebrate assemblages (e.g. Baxter et al. 2004; Albariño & Buria 2011) and, in some cases, caused indirect cascading effects on resources such as benthic periphyton (e.g. Herbst et al. 2009; Buria et al. 2010) and particulate organic matter (e.g. Buria et al. 2010) at the base of the food web. Together with brown trout Salmo trutta Linnaeus, 1758, these fish have had a particularly devastating impact on fish diversity across their introduced range in the Southern Hemisphere (McDowall 2006) and have consequently both been listed among the world’s 100 worst alien invasive species (Lowe et al. 2000).
Rainbow trout (henceforth, ‘trout’) was introduced to the Cape Floristic Region (CFR) of South Africa in 1897 for angling purposes, was widely stocked to create fisher- ies and has since established self-sustaining populations in all of the region’s major river systems (Ellender et al. 2014). Recent surveys conducted by Shelton et al. (2014a) in 24 headwater streams in the upper Breede River catchment (in the CFR) revealed that trout gene- rally replace a native cyprinid minnow, the Breede River redfin Pseudobarbus burchelli (Smith 1841) (henceforth, ‘redfin’), as the numerically dominant vertebrate pre- dator (although these species can coexist where trout densities are relatively low (<3 fish 100m 2)). The feeding habits of redfin have not been well studied, but available information suggests that they feed directly from the benthos, mainly on aquatic inverte- brates (Cambray & Stewart 1985; de Wet 1990). Trout, while also capable of benthic foraging, gene- rally feed on drifting invertebrate prey and, in addition to consuming aquatic invertebrates, can acquire a sub- stantial proportion of their diet from terrestrial inverte- brates that fall into the stream from the riparian zone (Nakano et al. 1999). If terrestrial invertebrates feature strongly in the diet of trout in CFR streams, then this may offset their impact on benthic invertebrates and result in a higher abundance of benthic invertebrates in streams where trout have replaced redfin (Dahl & Greenberg 1996).
Indeed, surveys of lower trophic levels in CFR headwater streams have revealed differences in inver- tebrate abundance and assemblage composition and, in periphyton biomass, between streams with and without trout. Specifically, benthic invertebrate abundance is higher (a pattern driven largely by herbivorous taxa), and periphyton biomass lower, in streams with trout than in streams with no trout (Shelton et al. 2014b). This pattern implies that trout are weaker regulators of benthic invertebrate abundance than are the native redfin, which they have replaced, and suggests that they have induced a trophic cascade by releasing herbivorous invertebrates from predation, leading to an increase in grazing pressure and a consequent indirect decrease in periphyton biomass.
In this study, using a manipulative field experiment conducted in a CFR headwater stream, we compared the influence of redfin and trout on the structure of benthic communities in order to ascertain whether species-specific differences in top-down effects could potentially account for the differences in benthic com- munity structure between streams with and without trout. We hypothesized the following: (i) redfin would deplete invertebrate abundance more strongly than would trout; (ii) trout and redfin would have distinct effects on invertebrate assemblage composition; and (iii) periphyton biomass would be higher in the presence of redfin than in the presence of trout.

xmethods
Site description
Our experiment was conducted in Morainekloof Stream (33°29′53.27′′S, 19°29′38.46′′E), a small, second-order, near-pristine tributary of the upper Breede River in the CFR of South Africa (see Shelton et al. 2014b for a detailed description of headwater streams in the upper Breede catchment). Snorkel surveys (Shelton et al. 2014a) indicated that the fish assemblage in Morainekloof Stream consists of rainbow trout, Breede River redfin and Cape kurper Sandelia capensis (Cuvier 1831). The experimental reach had a narrow wetted channel (approximately 4 m wide) and consisted of alternating sections of erosional (run and riffle) and depositional (pool) habitats. The stream is relatively shallow (<1m), and the substrate consists predominantly of cobbles and boulders. Riparian vegetation is entirely indigenous and comprises broad-leaved, woody species such as Salix mucronata and Metrosideros spp.
Experimental design
To test our hypotheses, four treatments were established, in- cluding a treatment containing trout in cages, a treatment containing redfin in cages, a treatment consisting of cages without any fish (which acted as a control against which fish effects could be assessed) and a natural stream treatment with no cages (to evaluate the effect of the cages on benthic community structure). The experiment was set up according to a randomized complete block design, with a total of four experimental blocks, each containing all four treatments. Blocks were used to account for possible longitudinal varia- tion in habitat, and all four blocks were situated in erosional habitat and separated by about 50m of stream. Fish were manipulated using plastic cages that were 1.5 m long, 1 m wide and lined on the bottom and sides with 10-mm dia- meter mesh. This mesh size was chosen because it was suffi- ciently small to contain fish within the cages but large enough to allow invertebrates to move in and out of the cages. Cages were installed by clearing a layer of substrate from the streambed and inserting the cage into the cleared area. The substrate particles removed during clearing were then replaced on top of the cage bases in order to anchor the cages to the streambed and provide natural substrate and cover for fish and invertebrates. Fish were added to the cages on 28 January 2011, and the tops of the cages were then fitted with removable 50-mm diameter plastic mesh covers. The experiment was left to run for 30 days and was terminated on 26 February 2011. Cages were checked twice a week, and any debris that had accumulated on the cage walls was removed to promote natural current flow through the cages. Similar experimental designs have been used by other field experiments examining trout predation in streams (e.g. Ruetz et al. 2004; Meissner & Muotka 2006; Cheever & Simon 2009).
Invertebrates and organic matter
Plastic mesh baskets (150 × 150 × 50 mm; 10-mm mesh size) containing stones from the stream were used as standardized sampling units for benthic invertebrates and organic matter. Baskets received three stones (maximum diameter: 80–120 mm) randomly collected from erosional habitats that had been cleaned of invertebrates but with the periphyton layer left intact. Four baskets were randomly assigned to each cage on 12 January 2011, 16 days prior to the beginning of the exper- iment so that they could be colonized by invertebrates (Rosenfeld 2000; Cheever & Simon 2009). The baskets were removed at the end of the experiment using a 250-μm mesh hand net, and the contents passed through a 250-μm sieve and preserved in 70% ethanol for processing of invertebrates and organic matter. All invertebrates were removed from each sample, and the remaining material was set aside for measuring the levels of particulate organic matter. Invertebrates were identified to lowest feasible taxonomic level, enumerated and assigned to functional feeding groups including collector gath- erers, filter feeders, grazer scrapers, predators and shredders (Cummins et al. 2008). The density (number m 2) of each invertebrate taxon and each functional feeding group was calculated based on the area of streambed incorporated in each mesh basket (0.0225 m2). The remaining material was elutriated to remove sand and gravel, and then the remaining organic matter was passed through a 1-mm sieve to separate out fine (250–1000 μm) and coarse (>1000 μm) particulate organic matter. The ash-free dry mass of each sample (g m 2) was then calculated by subtracting the mass of the ashed sample
The second portion of the sample was then passed through a Whatman GF/F 0.7-μm glass fibre filter paper, and chlorophyll a was extracted from filter papers using 90% ethanol. Pigment concentrations were then measured using the spectrophoto- metric method outlined by Biggs and Kilroy (2000), and absor- bance (665 and 750 nm) was measured using a Merck Spectroquant Pharo 100 spectrophotometer. The dimensions of the stone tiles were then used to calculate the biomasses of periphyton (g m 2) and chlorophyll a (mg m 2).
Fish
Fish for the experiment were captured using fyke nets set in Morainekloof Stream approximately 1 km downstream of the experimental reach on the two nights before the experiment begun (26 and 27 January 2011). All redfin and trout captured were held plastic buckets containing aerated stream water, cobbles (for shelter) and invertebrates (for food) for a maxi- mum of 48 h. On the day that the experiment was initiated, fish were removed from the plastic buckets and anesthetized with 2-phenoxy-ethanol (MS222) so that minimal stress was incurred by fish during weighing (to the nearest 0.01 g) and measuring (total length to the nearest 1 mm). The fish treat- ments consisted of either two redfin or two trout, and we attempted to match the total combined weight of the two redfin to that of the two trout in the cages within a block as closely as possible. Thus, any differences in benthic community structure among treatments at the end of the experiment could be attrib- uted to fish identity, rather than biomass or density effects. The lengths of fish used ranged from 77 to 96 mm for redfin and from 83 to 103 mm for trout, which fell within size distribution peaks for these species in headwater streams in the upper Breede River catchment. The density of fish in the cages (133.33 fish 100m 2) fell close to the upper end of natural redfin and trout densities in the upper Breede River catchment (Shelton et al. 2014a) but fell within the range of densities observed within erosional habitat patches. At the end of the experiment, fish were removed from the cages, euthanized with a lethal dose of MS222 and preserved in 70% ethanol. Stomachs were dissected, and food items were assigned to one of the five aquatic invertebrate functional feeding groups or classified as terrestrial invertebrates, algae or detritus. The material within each food category was then blot dried for 30 s on filter paper and weighed to the nearest 0.0001 g to obtain an estimate of the wet weight of each category in each stomach.
Environmental parameters
A set of physicochemical parameters was measured inside each cage and for the ‘stream’ experimental units halfway through the study period (14 February 2011) to identify whether there were any consistent differences in environmental conditions among treatments. Measured parameters included depth (m), flow (m s 1), canopy cover (estimated from a digital grid placed over photographs taken directly upwards from the centre of each
(combusted at 500 °C for 1 h) sample (dried at 60 °C for 24 h).
Periphyton
from that
of the
oven-dried
Stone tiles (100 × 100 mm) were used to assess the biomass of benthic periphyton in the cages because they offer a standard- ized size, shape and surface texture and therefore reduce natu- ral variation in algal biomass (Rosenfeld 2000). Tiles were placed in an erosional reach within the study area 44 days before the experiment begun so that they could be colonized by periphyton (Lamberti & Resh 1983; Dahl 1998). The tiles were removed and randomly assigned to the treatments at the onset of the experiment (four tiles per treatment per block). At the end of the experiment, tiles were removed from the cages/stream bed, placed into a plastic tray containing 300 ml of stream water and scrubbed for 2min with a toothbrush, and the resulting slurry was frozen in the dark within 3 h of collection. The samples were defrosted within 30 days of collec- tion, homogenized and split into two 150-ml portions: one for measurement of periphyton biomass and one for measurement of chlorophyll a (a measure of live algal biomass in each sample). Periphyton biomass was estimated from the first portion of the sample as the difference between the dry weight of the sample (dried at 60 °C for 24 h) and the weight of the ashed sample (samples were ashed in an oven at 400 °C for 4 h).
turbidity Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) and tempera- ture (°C). All parameters were measured at three random loca- tions within each experimental unit, with the exception of canopy cover, which was estimated as total percentage cover.
Data analysis
Multivariate analyses (based on procedures outlined by Anderson et al. 2008) were used to test for differences in the taxonomic composition of invertebrate assemblages among treatments. Invertebrate abundance data were fourth root transformed and converted to a resemblance matrix using Bray–Curtis similarity. nMDS ordination was used to visualize differences in invertebrate assemblage composition among treatments, and two-way mixed model permutational multi- variate ANOVA (PERMANOVA) used to examine the effect of the fixed factor ‘treatment’ and the random factor ‘block’ on invertebrate assemblage composition. PERMANOVAs were followed by permutational post-hoc tests to examine pair-wise differences among treatments. Analyses of similarity percent- ages (SIMPER) were used to identify the taxa contributing most to the overall dissimilarity in taxonomic assemblage com- position among treatments. The densities of the top taxa that collectively contributed to more than 70% of the dissimilarity were compared among treatments (density data were first ln (x + 1) transformed to improve normality and homogeneity of variances) using independent sample t-tests. Mixed model ANOVAs, with treatment as a fixed factor and block as a random factor, were used to test for significant treatment and block effects on the response variables total invertebrate density, the densities of each functional feeding group, chlorophyll a concen- tration, periphyton biomass, the biomasses of fine and coarse particulate organic matter, and each of the physicochemical parameters. Changes in fish biomass over the experimental period were assessed using matched pairs t-tests, with the two fish treatments within each block treated as pairs. All variables were ln (x+1) transformed a priori to improve normality and homo- geneity of variances. Post-hoc pair-wise comparisons between treatments were performed using Tukey’s honestly significant difference tests. Stomach content compositions of redfin and trout were summarized by calculating the mean percentage contribution by weight (%W) of each food category (Cortés 1997). Mann–Whitney U-tests were then used to compare the contribution of each food type between trout and redfin, because the data did not meet the assumptions of parametric analysis, even after transformation. All univariate analyses were carried out with SPSS 22.0.0.0, and multivariate analyses with PRIMER 6.1.12 and PERMANOVA+ 1.0.2.

xresults
Invertebrates
The composition of the invertebrate assemblages in the cages was significantly different among treatments (F3,9 = 4.47, P = 0.018) but not among blocks (F3,9 = 1.31,
P = 0.184). The nMDS ordination revealed that inverte- brate assemblages in cages with redfin separated out clearly from those in the other three treatments and that assemblages in the trout cages appeared to be distinct from those in the stream treatment (Fig. 1). Permuta- tional post-hoc tests confirmed significant pair-wise differ- ences for the redfin versus no-fish (t3 = 2.38, P = 0.031), redfin versus stream (t3 = 2.24, P = 0.044), redfin versus trout (t3 = 2.45, P = 0.021) and trout versus stream (t3 = 2.51, P = 0.019) comparisons, but pair-wise differ- ences between other treatments were not significant.
The average dissimilarity in taxonomic composition between the redfin and the no-fish treatments was 43.19%, and differences between these treatments were driven largely by the dipterans Chironominae (t3 = 3.38, P = 0.014), Orthocladiinae (t3 = 1.71, P = 0.068) and Tanypodinae (t3 = 1.99, P = 0.046), as well as the ephemeropterans Labiobaetis spp. (t3 = 3.77, P = 0.009) and Afroptilum spp. (t3 = 2.46, P = 0.022), which collec- tively accounted for 69.47% of the overall dissimilarity (Fig. 2a). With the exception of Tanypodinae, the densi- ties of these taxa were higher in the control treatment than in the redfin treatment. The average dissimilarity in taxonomic composition between the redfin and stream treatments was 49.25%, with differences in assemblages driven largely by a significantly greater abundance of the ephemeropterans Lestagella penicillata (t3 =  2.83, P = 0.030), Labiobaetis spp. (t3 =  2.98, P = 0.021), Baetis spp. (t3 =  2.72, P = 0.035) and Afroptilum spp. (t3 =  3.46, P = 0.014) in the stream treatment (Fig. 2b). The average dissimilarity between redfin and trout treatments was 43.67%, and differences between these treatments were driven largely by the dipterans Chironominae (t3 = 3.52, P = 0.006), Orthocladiinae
(t3 = 0.48,
P = 0.321) and
Tanypodinae
(t3 = 2.34, 
2) as well as the ephemeropterans Labiobaetis spp. (t3 = 5.55, P = <0.001) and Baetis spp. (t3 = 4.1, P = 0.003), which collectively accounted for 70.15% of the overall dissimilarity (Fig. 2c). Tanypodinae was the only taxon that had a higher density in the redfin treat- ment than in the trout treatment. Finally, the dissimilarity between the trout and stream treatments was 40.77%, and differences between these treatments were driven largely by a higher abundance of Chironominae (t3 =  3.77, P = 0.009) and L. penicillata (t3 = 2.806, P=0.031) and a lower abundance of Afroptilum spp. (t3 =  5.387, P = 0.002), in the trout treatment (Fig. 2d).
There was a significant treatment effect on total inver- tebrate density (F3,9 = 15.60, P = 0.001; Fig. 3a), which, in the redfin treatment, was significantly lower than that in stream (P = 0.001), no-fish (P = 0.011) and trout (P = 0.015) treatments (see mean ± SE for the various invertebrate response variables). At the end of the experi- ment, collector gatherers were the numerically dominant functional feeding group, comprising 85.31% of the as- semblage, followed by predators and grazer scrapers, which comprised 8.25% and 3.69%, respectively. Shred- ders and filter feeders were not abundant, both compris- ing less than 2% of the assemblage. Treatment effects
was significantly lower than that in the stream (P = 0.046), no-fish (P = 0.031) and trout (P = 0.042) treatments. Finally, predator density in the redfin treatment was significantly lower than that in the stream (P = 0.041) and no-fish (P = 0.041) treatments, but predator density in the trout treatment did not differ significantly from that in the other three treatments. Block effects were not significant, except for predators (P = 0.034), indicating that treatment effects on predators were not consistent among blocks.
Lower trophic levels
Differences in the biomasses of chlorophyll a (F3,9 = 3.37, P = 0.105; Fig. 4a), periphyton (F3,9 = 2.46, P = 0.166; Fig. 4b) and fine (F3,9 = 2.92, P = 0.130; Fig. 4c) and coarse (F3,9 = 0.43, P = 0.803; Fig. 4d) particulate or- ganic matter among treatments were not statistically significant. However, block effects were significant for chlorophyll a (F3,9 = 6.59, P = 0.012) and periphyton ash-free dry mass (F3,9 = 4.53, P = 0.034) but not fine and coarse particulate organic matter, implying that treatment effects on periphyton were not consistent among blocks.
Fish and environmental parameters
Neither trout (t3 = 0.79, P = 0.486) nor redfin (t3 = 1.52, P = 0.226) experienced a significant decrease in weight over the experimental period. In total, the fish guts examined contained five taxa of terrestrial invertebrate, 17 taxa of aquatic invertebrate, algae and detritus, but the percentage contributions of these food types differed
were significant for collector
P = 0.003; Fig. 3b), grazer
P = 0.024; Fig. 3d) and
P = 0.028; Fig. 3e) but not for filter feeders (F3,9 = 0.71, P = 0.530; Fig. 3c) or shredders (F3,9 = 2.93, P = 0.129; Fig. 3f). Collector gatherer density in the redfin treatment was significantly lower than that in the stream (P = 0.004), no-fish (P = 0.016) and trout (P = 0.019) treatments. Similarly, grazer scraper density in the redfin treatmen
between redfin and trout (Fig. 5). Terrestrial inverte- brates barely featured in the gut contents of redfin (%W < 5) but dominated the gut contents of trout (%W>50; z=2.21, P=0.027). Conversely, aquatic invertebrates contributed more to the gut contents of redfin (%W ~ 40) than trout (%W ~ 25), but this difference was not statistically significant. Collector gatherers contributed more to the gut contents of redfin (%W ~ 25) than trout (%W ~ 10; z = 2.05, P = 0.040). Shredders were absent from the guts of both fish species, and while also relatively uncom- mon (%W < 10), filter feeders, grazer scrapers and predators contributed somewhat more to the gut contents of redfin than trout. Detritus contributed more to the gut contents of redfin than trout, but differences in the contributions of detritus and algae to fish gut contents were not significant. The mean values of all measured environmental parameters were similar among treatments, and significant treatment effects were not detected for any of these variables.

xdiscussion
Direct effects on invertebrate abundance
That total benthic invertebrate abundance was more strongly depleted in the redfin treatment than in the trout treatment is consistent with results from a multistream comparative field survey conducted in the upper Breede River catchment by Shelton et al. (2014b), which showed that total invertebrate density in redfin-dominated streams was consistently lower than that in trout-dominated streams. Agreement between our experimental and survey results constitutes good evidence that introduced trout perform a novel functional role in these systems, being weaker regulators of benthic invertebrates than native redfin. Our results imply that the replacement of redfin by trout represents the removal of a top-down control in the stream community, leading to a proliferation of benthic inverte- brates in streams dominated by trout. This pattern contrasts with most studies examining the impacts of
nonnative salmonids on benthic invertebrates in streams elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere; in general, salmonid invasions lead to a reduction in invertebrate abundance. For example, in New Zealand, introduced brown trout S. trutta raise predation pressure on benthic invertebrates resulting in lower invertebrate abundance in streams where they have replaced native fish (Galaxias spp.) than in streams with no trout (see reviews by Simon & Townsend 2003; Townsend 2003). Indeed, introduced predators are generally
expected to have a strong impact on native prey assemblages because prey species lack evolutionary experience of the novel predator and are consequently naive towards it (Cox & Lima 2006).
Discrepancy between our findings and those from studies elsewhere could result from several factors including the extent to which trout deplete native fish abundance, differences in density and biomass of trout versus native fish populations and differences in feeding habits between trout and native fish species. Most studies of community-level responses to salmo- nid invasions elsewhere have been conducted either in systems that lack native vertebrate predator assem- blages (e.g. Herbst et al. 2009; Buria et al. 2010), in streams where trout have depleted native predators that exert relatively weak predation pressure on herbiv- orous invertebrates (e.g. Flecker & Townsend 1994; McIntosh & Townsend 1996; Biggs et al. 2000; Nyström et al. 2003) or in streams where trout signifi- cantly raise the fish biomass relative to trout-free streams (Huryn 1998; Townsend 2003), which might explain why trout are generally found to increase top- down control over invertebrate abundance. Because we controlled for differences in fish biomass in our experiment and because trout have not significantly altered fish biomass in CFR headwater streams (Shelton et al. 2014a), our findings imply that differ- ences in feeding habits between trout and redfin (specifically, that trout consume less benthic inverte- brates than do redfin) are the primary reason for the observed patterns.
Our results are consistent with other studies that also found strong effects of benthic feeding relative to drift-feeding fish (e.g. Dahl & Greenberg 1996; Dahl 1998; Cheever & Simon 2009) but contrast with studies that found benthic and drift feeders to have equivalent impacts on benthic stream invertebrates (e.g. Ruetz et al. 2004; Zimmerman & Vondracek 2007). The extent to which the predatory impact of drift feeders on benthic invertebrates diverges from that of benthic feeders may be linked to the availability of alternative food sources, such as terrestrial invertebrates, in the drift. Where drifting terrestrial invertebrates are abundant, they can contribute strongly to the diet of drift-feeding salmonids (Nakano et al. 1999) and thereby reduce the strength of the predation pressure exerted on benthic invertebrate prey (Dahl & Greenberg 1996; Dahl 1998). Our gut content analyses, while admittedly based on small sample sizes, indicate that aquatic invertebrates (particularly collector gatherer taxa) contributed more to the diet of redfin while terrestrial invertebrates contributed more to the diet of trout, suggesting that terrestrial subsidies may indeed offset trout impacts on aquatic invertebrates in CFR headwater streams. These findings are broadly consistent with previous studies of redfin and trout diets in the CFR in that aquatic invertebrates tend to dominate the diet of redfin (Cambray & Stewart 1985; de Wet 1990), while terrestrial invertebrates are more common in the diet of trout (Woodford 2002). Future studies comparing the diets, as well as feeding rates and metabolisms (which may also influence predation pressure exerted on prey populations), of redfin and trout in natural stream settings and using larger sample sizes would shed further light on the mechanisms behind the divergent top-down effects of these species.
Direct effects on invertebrate assemblage composition
Redfin caused a significant shift in the invertebrate as- semblage composition by depleting the density of certain taxa, while trout had no discernible effect on assemblage composition. Collector gatherers and grazer scrapers were strongly depleted by redfin but not trout, and taxa within these functional feeding groups were largely re- sponsible for the differences in assemblage composition between the trout and redfin treatments. These results are consistent with those of Shelton et al. (2014b) in that differences in assemblage composition between redfin- dominated and trout-dominated streams were driven largely by lower densities of collector gatherer and grazer scraper taxa in redfin-dominated streams. This congru- ency constitutes good evidence that redfin are stronger regulators of certain herbivorous invertebrates than are trout and that this leads to a higher overall invertebrate
abundance and altered assemblage composition, in the presence of trout. That trout can strongly alter the struc- ture and function of the benthic invertebrate assem- blage, in addition to depleting native fish abundance, in CFR headwater streams should be an important man- agement consideration.
While decreases in the densities of the other functional feeding groups in the redfin treatment relative to the control and trout treatments were observed, these differ- ences were not significant, perhaps because of the rela- tively low overall densities of these groups or because of the relatively high intercage variation in their densities. Our findings here, as well as those of other studies documenting selective predation by benthic-feeding fish on herbivorous invertebrates (e.g. Cheever & Simon 2009), suggest that the vulnerability of benthic inverte- brates to fish predation may be influenced by their feed- ing habits. The taxa reduced most strongly by redfin in our experiment (and in the Shelton et al. (2014b) field survey) tended to be taxa that feed on periphyton and as- sociated organic material in exposed habitats such as the surfaces of stones, and this epibenthic foraging behav- iour likely renders them particularly vulnerable to preda- tion by benthic-feeding fish (Rosenfeld 2000). On the other hand, taxa that feed in more complex habitats like the interstices between stones and leaf packs are less ac- cessible to benthic-feeding fish (Rosenfeld 2000), which may explain why shredder taxa were not strongly influ- enced by fish in our experiment (and were absent from fish guts).
Indirect effects on periphyton and particulate organic matter
The suppression of herbivorous invertebrate abundance by redfin did not translate into cascading effects on chlo- rophyll a or periphyton biomass. These results contrast with those of Shelton et al. (2014b) that chlorophyll a biomass in redfin-dominated streams (with a relatively low density of herbivorous invertebrates) was signifi- cantly greater than that at trout-dominated streams (where herbivorous invertebrate density was relatively high). Furthermore, our data contrast with other ex- perimental studies that detected significant cascading effects on benthic periphyton in cases where fish influ- enced the abundance of herbivorous invertebrates (e.g. Flecker & Townsend 1994; Dahl 1998). It may be that the experimental duration of 1month was insufficient for fish effects on herbivorous invertebrates to cascade down to benthic periphyton but others (e.g. Bechara et al. 1993; Flecker & Townsend 1994) have detected significant invertebrate-mediated fish effects on algal biomass over similar time scales. Alternatively, the tiles used for sampling algal biomass offered invertebrates minimal refuges from fish predation (Rosenfeld 2000), and invertebrates may therefore have avoided feeding
in these exposed habitats (but see McIntosh & Townsend 1996; Rosenfeld 2000; Nyström et al. 2001 who recorded significant fish effects on algal biomass using similar tile substrates). The lack of treatment ef- fects on particulate organic matter is consistent with the survey results of Shelton et al. (2014b) and with other studies reporting weak or no effect of fish on standing stocks of organic matter in headwater streams elsewhere (Rosenfeld 2000; Herbst et al. 2009; Buria et al. 2010). Trophic cascades in detritus-based food chains may be uncommon because detritivorous invertebrates feed on detrital accumulations in substrate interstices and are thus relatively inaccessible to fish, as noted earlier. Fi- nally, detrital food chains are donor-controlled systems driven by leaf-litter inputs from the adjacent riparian ecosystem (Polis & Strong 1996), and detrital inputs from the riparian zone may therefore have overwhelmed the effects of detritivores on particulate organic matter in our experiment.
Limitations and future directions
The fish used in our experiment were confined to rela- tively small areas of erosional habitat, which may have in- fluenced their foraging behaviours. However, that all fish survived and that there were no significant declines in weight suggest that fish had access to a reasonable quan- tity of food. Natural populations of trout and redfin comprise a broad range of size classes, but only a narrow range of fish sizes was utilized in this experiment, and caution should therefore be exercised when scaling up our results. Natural streams comprise both erosional and depositional habitats, but this experiment was con- ducted in erosional zones only, so future studies should look to expand this work to include depositional zones as well. Experimental cages can slow current flows (e.g. Zimmerman & Vondracek 2007), which could promote accrual of sediment and potentially lead to an unnatural benthic community structure. However, that current ve- locity and substrate composition did not differ signifi- cantly between the treatments with and without cages suggests that our cages provided a good approximation of the natural stream environment. Because invertebrate drift entering and leaving the cages was not quantified, we cannot ascertain whether the observed changes in invertebrate abundance were primarily a consumptive effect, a behavioural effect or a combination of both (Cooper et al. 1990). Fish effects on prey abundance in experiments conducted at small scales tend to reflect be- havioural responses to predator presence (i.e. increased emigration), while prey responses at larger spatial scales are generally indicative of consumption (Englund 1997; Englund & Cooper 2003). Although we cannot evaluate the role of emigration in the observed effects on inverte- brate abundance in our experiment, concordance be- tween the experimental results, gut content analyses
and patterns in invertebrate assemblages measured in natural streams (Shelton et al. 2014b) implies that con- sumption was likely also important. The use of larger cages (e.g. Flecker 1996) or fenced-off sections of stream (e.g. Baxter et al. 2004; Winkelmann et al. 2011; Lepori et al. 2012) and a longer experimental duration could potentially mitigate some of these scale-related issues, but logistical challenges would be considerable in moun- tainous areas where access to study sites is difficult like CFR headwater streams.
CONCLUSIONS
Our experimental data show that introduced trout and native redfin have nonequivalent effects on benthic in- vertebrate abundance and assemblage structure in CFR headwater streams. Specifically, the abundance of herbivorous aquatic invertebrates was more strongly de- pleted by redfin than by trout, which had little discern- ible influence over invertebrate assemblages at all. That trout are weaker regulators of benthic invertebrate abun- dance than redfin is consistent with the higher abun- dance of herbivorous invertebrates in streams where trout have replaced redfin relative to uninvaded streams where healthy redfin populations persist (Shelton et al. 2014b). Moreover, our gut content analysis showed that aquatic invertebrates contributed more to the diet of redfin, while terrestrial invertebrates contributed more to the diet of trout, which may be responsible for the rel- atively weak effect of trout on aquatic invertebrates. Thus, while trout do not significantly alter the biomass of fish in CFR streams (in contrast to other parts of the world where they have significantly raised fish biomass), their ability to replace native predators that use a different feeding strategy may lead to significant changes in top- down control in the stream community. This pattern con- trasts with nonnative salmonid impacts elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere where, in general, salmonid inva- sions have led to a reduction in invertebrate abundance. That trout can strongly alter the structure of benthic in- vertebrate assemblages, in addition to severely depleting native fish abundance, in CFR headwater streams should be weighed into management decisions. Finally, our find- ings highlight the need for a detailed understanding of species-specific top-down effects where native predators are replaced by invasive predators.


