xabstract Restored and constructed habitats can play important conservation roles. Predators help
shape communities in these habitats through complex interactions with prey, other predators
and biotic and abiotic characteristics of the environment. However, introduced predators can
have dramatic effects that may be difficult to predict. Using regression models, we compared influences of introduced invasive western mosquitofish
Gambusia affinis to those of two naturally colonizing predators (crayfish and dragonflies),
and vegetation, on three anuran species in experimentally constructed wetlands. Using
analyses of covariance, we also examined influences of mosquitofish and vegetation on aquatic
invertebrate communities. We found that mosquitofish reduced abundances of grey treefrogs Hyla versicolor and
H. chrysoscelis and boreal chorus frog Pseudacris maculata, but had no significant influence
on green frog Lithobates clamitans. Mosquitofish also reduced invertebrate abundance, but
their effect on richness was less clear. Vegetation cover did not significantly increase most
anuran or invertebrate abundances. However, vegetation increased invertebrate richness.
After fish removal, invertebrate abundance increased. Fish removal may have facilitated chorus
frog re-colonization into wetlands with low abundance of invertebrate predators. Our results indicate that mosquitofish are detrimental to wetland communities, and we
recommend that managers avoid stocking mosquitofish. We also encourage temporary or drainable
wetlands to prevent mosquitofish persistence if colonization occurs. Implementing these
recommendations will improve the conservation potential of restored wetlands. 


xintroduction A major challenge for restoration ecologists involves predicting
pathways of ecological succession in the presence
of multiple biotic and abiotic conditions. Predators play
key roles in shaping natural communities through interactions
with prey and other predators (Van Buskirk 1988;
Griffen 2006). These interactions are often complex,
thereby making discernment of mechanisms generating
natural community patterns and structure difficult
(DeWitt & Langerhans 2003). Most prey species are consumed
by multiple predators, but prey responses to different
predators are not the same. The reaction by prey to
one predator may make it more or less vulnerable to
another, depending on the nature of interactions between
the two predators (Sih, Englund & Wooster 1998). These
interactions are important during restoration because as
succession proceeds, food webs develop based upon conditions
present at a site, some of which can be manipulated
by the restoration ecologist. For example, wetland
hydroperiod plays a major role in shaping wetland communities
(Pechmann et al. 1989) so designing wetlands
with temporary or permanent hydroperiods will have a
direct impact on community composition (Pechmann
et al. 2001).
Introduced predators can dramatically alter community
development, particularly if the predator is invasive and
prey do not possess adaptive traits to reduce mortality
(NystrÄom et al. 2001). Introduced fish have been implicated
in aquatic community disruptions. Eastern Gambu-sia holbrookii (Girard 1859) and western G. affinis mosquitofish are small poeciliids native to the southeastern
United States, but introduced throughout the
world because of their purported effectiveness at controlling
mosquitoes (Pyke 2008). Mosquitofish readily consume
invertebrates, small fish and amphibian eggs and
larvae (Pyke & White 2000; Richard 2002), and they can
alter the composition of the aquatic invertebrate community
(Hurlbert, Zedler & Fairbanks 1972). Mosquitofish
are the most widespread fish in the world (Pyke 2008), and
the IUCN lists them among the 100 worst invasive species
(Lowe, Browne & Boudjelas 2000). Introductions have
been associated with amphibian declines in California,
Australia and China (Lawler et al. 1999; Pyke & White
2000; Karraker, Arrigoni & Dudgeon 2010), and negative
effects have been recorded in experiments using eggs and
larvae of amphibian species within their native range
(Grubb 1972; Baber & Babbitt 2004; Stanback 2010).
Dragonfly naiads and crayfish are top invertebrate
predators in many wetlands. Dragonflies are carnivorous
and consume other aquatic invertebrates and small fish
(Merrill & Johnson 1984; Van Buskirk 1988). They are
also efficient consumers of larval amphibians (Smith 1983;
Semlitsch & Gibbons 1988). Crayfish are highly omnivorous
and consume detritus, vegetation, invertebrates,
carrion, fish eggs and young, and amphibian eggs and
larvae (Momot 1995; Dorn & Wojdak 2004). Although
dragonflies are generalist predators (Wallace et al. 1987),
their trophic impact is likely to be narrower than crayfish,
which can directly impact multiple trophic levels (Dorn &
Wojdak 2004). Introduced crayfish can disrupt aquatic
communities and have been implicated in amphibian
declines (Gamradt & Kats 1996; Axelsson et al. 1997).
However, the results from other studies suggest that crayfish
are inefficient predators of larval amphibians (Fauth
1990; Lefcort 1996). Nevertheless, crayfish can destroy
vegetation (Axelsson et al. 1997), thus lowering habitat
complexity and potentially contributing to reduced
amphibian abundance.
We compared the influences of introduced western mosquitofish
to two native predators (crayfish and dragonflies)
on three amphibian species in experimental
constructed wetlands. Grey treefrogs Hyla versicolor/chrysoscelis
complex, boreal chorus frogs Pseudacris maculata
and green frogs Lithobates clamitans were selected because
each species employs different mechanisms to cope with
predation (Smith 1983; Van Buskirk 2003). Grey treefrogs
and boreal chorus frogs are palatable to fish, but green
frogs are not (Kats, Petranka & Sih 1988). Furthermore,
chorus frogs prefer temporary wetlands, whereas grey
treefrogs will reproduce in both temporary and permanent
water, and green frogs require relatively permanent water
(Kats, Petranka & Sih 1988). We predicted mosquitofish
would have a greater negative impact on hylids than on
green frogs, and mosquitofish effects would be greater
than those of crayfish and dragonflies. We also examined
the influence of mosquitofish on aquatic invertebrates and
whether vegetation attenuates fish impacts. We hypothesized
mosquitofish would lower invertebrate abundance and
richness and vegetation would attenuate predation
because habitat complexity can provide refuge for prey
(Sass et al. 2006; Hartel et al. 2007).
This research is part of a larger study that aims to
improve the conservation potential of restored and constructed
wetlands (see Shulse 2011 and Shulse et al. 2012).
The current study examines the roles of predators and
vegetation in determining amphibian and invertebrate
communities following wetland construction. We focus on
mosquitofish because of their widespread use and the perception
that they are benign to native wildlife (Pyke
2008). Our goals were to investigate whether mosquitofish
influence wetland communities differently than native predators
and to present wetland management recommendations
based on replicated experimentation in the field. 


xmethods 

During October and November 2006, we constructed replicate
wetland arrays at three upland grassland habitats in north-eastern
Missouri, USA (Fig. 1), managed by the Missouri Department of
Conservation (MDC). Six wetlands (23 m diameter, 076 m maximum
depth) were constructed at each location (n = 18). A complete
description of wetland designs, placement and surrounding
landscapes is given in Shulse et al. (2012). A goal of another
study at these wetlands was to examine the influences of withinwetland
slope, mosquitofish and vegetation on amphibian metamorph
production and species richness (Shulse et al. 2012).
Therefore, we randomly assigned one of the six combinations of
slope, mosquitofish and vegetation to each wetland (Table 1).
Planted wetlands received 50 cordgrass Spartina pectinata divisions
spaced evenly apart and radiating from the centre. Nonsurviving
plants were replaced during autumn 2007. All other
vegetation was allowed to develop naturally.
In March 2007, we captured mosquitofish in a Missouri
Department of Transportation compensatory mitigation wetland
in Audrain County, Missouri, and released them into the three
selected wetlands at each MDC location at a rate of 3089 fish
ha
1, which is slightly higher than the rate of 2471 fish ha
1
(1000 fish acre
1) recommended by Duryea et al. (1996). This
resulted in a founding population of 125 adult mosquitofish per
stocked wetland. Fish were re-stocked where samples indicated
low populations in spring 2008. Reconnaissance sampling in early
spring 2009 revealed healthy mosquitofish populations in all
stocked wetlands so no further re-stocking occurred. MDC personnel
removed mosquitofish from stocked wetlands at one location
(Redman) on 17 September 2009 using the piscicide
rotenone (chemical restoration). Rotenone was applied to stocked
wetlands at another site (Sears) on 10 March 2010. Rotenone was
applied at label rates. Dead mosquitofish were observed in all
wetlands. However, during the second sampling period in 2010,
mosquitofish were captured in one treated wetland (Sears 1).
Therefore, it was assumed that this wetland contained survivors
so we considered it fish-stocked for 2010 analyses. The stocked
wetlands at the third location (White) were not treated and
reconnaissance sampling in early spring 2010 indicated healthy
populations.
Amphibians, mosquitofish and invertebrates were sampled
three times within each season using aquatic funnel traps and dip nets. Aquatic funnel traps were deployed for 48 h in 2007 and
2008 and overnight in 2009 and 2010, using two kinds of commercially
available minnow traps: collapsible nylon mesh traps
(3-mm mesh; 38 9 26 9 26 cm; 6 cm openings) or galvanized
steel wire traps (6-mm mesh; 42 cm long; 25 cm openings). Two
traps of each were used per wetland and placements were staggered
so that traps of the same model were directly across from
one another at each cardinal direction. Pair direction assignment
was random. One dip net (3-mm nylon mesh) sweep was conducted
from the waterís edge at each cardinal direction and
sweeps were ~15 m long with the net pressed to the substrate
and pulled towards the sampler. During the second 2007 sampling
period, a zooplankton canvas D-net with 500-micron mesh
bottom was added to the protocol to capture very small organisms.
Sweeps of approximately 15 m occurred at each ordinal
direction using the D-net. This resulted in four dip net sweeps
and 4 D-net sweeps, spaced evenly apart, for each wetland during
each sampling period after 2007ñ1. Data from all methods were
combined to calculate amphibian, mosquitofish and invertebrate
abundances and invertebrate taxa richness at each wetland during
each sampling period. All organisms were released unharmed at
point of capture after recording. We were unable to distinguish
between eastern grey treefrogs and Copeís grey treefrogs in the
field so grey treefrogs are considered as the Hyla versicolor/chrysoscelis
complex.
Within-wetland vegetation was measured using four 1-m≤ quadrats
spaced at cardinal directions around the perimeter of each
wetland. Quadrats were placed at the edge of each wetland to
assess vegetation cover within 1 m of the shore and at 3 m from
the shore. The percentages of open water, emergent, floating and
submerged vegetation were visually estimated within each quadrat.
The three categories of vegetation were combined and averaged
for all quadrats over all sampling periods within a season at
each wetland to calculate an average measure of vegetation cover
for the season. Percentage vegetation cover was transformed to
the arcsine square root of the proportion for analyses. Development
of natural vegetation occurred faster in some non-planted
wetlands than in planted wetlands. Therefore, we used vegetation
cover as a continuous covariate within our analyses as opposed
to a treatment factor (below).
We analysed each year separately to look for overall patterns
in abundance or taxa richness. For regressions and ANCOVAs, a
single wetland was used as the unit of replication. All statistical
analyses were performed using SPSS version 160 (2007 SPSS
Chicago, IL, USA). To explain relationships between abundances
of amphibians, predators and vegetation cover, we developed
regression models with negative binomial distributions and loglink
functions using the generalized linear model option in SPSS.
We used abundances of mosquitofish, crayfish and dragonfly
naiads, along with vegetation cover, as independent variables. We
conducted Spearmanís rank correlation tests between independent
variables to avoid including two variables strongly correlated
with one another (r = 070) in models. Dragonfly abundance and
vegetation cover were highly correlated in 2008 and 2009
(Table 2); therefore, in models for these years, we focused our
analyses on predators and excluded vegetation cover. Each
regression model contained grey treefrog, boreal chorus frog or
green frog abundances as dependent variables, and either all four
independent variables or the three predator variables (2008 and
2009). Only crayfish, dragonflies and vegetation cover were
included in the model for grey treefrogs in 2010 because no grey
treefrogs were captured in wetlands containing fish in that year.
To test the hypothesis that mosquitofish reduce invertebrate
abundances, we used the cumulative number of invertebrates (log10-transformed) captured during all sampling periods each
year at each wetland as dependent variables in generalized linear
models with mosquitofish as a factor and vegetation cover as a
covariate. We excluded crayfish, snails, bivalves and daphniids
from ANCOVAs. Data for snails and bivalves were not collected
consistently, and daphniids were challenging to quantify at very
high numbers. Crayfish grow large enough to escape fish predation
(Stein 1977), and even the smallest crayfish we observed were
too large for gape-limited mosquitofish to consume.
To test whether mosquitofish reduce invertebrate richness, we
used the cumulative number of invertebrate taxa captured during
all sampling periods per year at each wetland as dependent variables
in generalized linear models. Mosquitofish presence was
included as a factor and vegetation cover as a covariate. Invertebrate
richness values included daphniids but excluded crayfish,
snails and bivalves. We attempted to identify each invertebrate to
family, but we were unable to identify some to this level in the
field (See Table S1, Supporting Information). To achieve normal
distribution, invertebrate taxa richness values were log10-
transformed for 2007. Because comparisons of taxa richness
among different assemblages should account for differences in
sampling effort and abundance (Gotelli & Colwell 2001), we plotted
rarefied richness curves for each year using EstimateS version
8.2 (Colwell 2005). We included daphniids in rarefaction analyses,
but we capped the number of daphnia at 100 per sample due to
the aforementioned quantification problems. For rarefaction, we
defined sample as the total individuals captured by all methods
during a single sampling period at each wetland. Finally, we performed Wilcoxon signed rank tests to evaluate invertebrate
abundance and taxa richness of chemically restored wetlands
before and after treatment.
xresults Regression analyses revealed negative associations
between grey treefrogs and mosquitofish during 2007,
2008 and 2009 (all P < 005; Table 3). Treefrogs were positively
associated with vegetation in 2007. No treefrog larvae
were captured in wetlands containing mosquitofish
during 2010. Treefrog abundance was also negatively
associated with crayfish abundance in 2007 and 2009 and
larval dragonflies in 2008. Treefrogs were most abundant
during 2007 (Fig. 2), but they were captured in only 39%
of the wetlands (Fig. 3). During subsequent years, they
were captured in roughly half of the wetlands but their
abundance dropped and remained at relatively low levels.
Boreal chorus frog tadpoles were never captured in
large numbers (i.e. >15) in wetlands containing mosquitofish.
We did not perform a regression analysis for chorus
frogs in 2007 because their larvae were captured in only
three wetlands. No fish, crayfish or dragonflies were captured
in these wetlands during the first two sampling periods
when chorus frogs were breeding. Chorus frogs were
negatively associated with mosquitofish in 2008
(P = 0001) and 2010 (P = 0009), and they were captured
in 67% of wetlands in 2008 and 44% in 2010. Only two
larval chorus frogs were captured in 2009 and they
occurred in a fish-free wetland. Chorus frogs were also
negatively associated with dragonflies in 2010 (P = 001).
The peak abundance for chorus frogs occurred during
2008 (Fig. 2). Although their larvae were nearly absent in
2009, both their abundance and occurrence increased
sharply in 2010 (Figs 2 and 3).
Green frogs did not occur in enough numbers to perform
regression analyses in 2007, but their abundance was
consistently negatively associated with crayfish during
2008, 2009 and 2010 (all P < 005). Green frogs were also
negatively associated with dragonflies in 2008 (P = 004).
There were no statistically significant relationships
between green frog abundance and mosquitofish. Green
frog abundance and occurrence increased over the course
of the study and peaked during the first sampling period
of 2010 (Figs 2 and 3).
Analyses using ANCOVAs revealed that invertebrate abundance
was significantly reduced in the fish-stocked wetlands
during all four sampling years (2007: F1,15 = 1325,
P = 0002; 2008: F1,15 = 2107, P < 0001; 2009: F1,15 = 5515,
P < 0001; 2010: F1,15 = 1560, P = 0001).Mean invertebrate
abundance was consistently higher in fish-free wetlands
throughout the duration of our study (Fig. 4). ANCOVAs also
indicated that mosquitofish significantly reduced invertebrate
taxa richness during the first 3 years (2007: F1,15 = 69,
P = 002; 2008: F1,15 = 191, P = 0001; 2009: F1,15 = 1461,
P = 0002), but not in 2010 (P = 056). The vegetation cover
covariate had no significant effects on invertebrate abundance
during any year, but it did significantly increase taxa richness in all years except 2007 before natural vegetation cover had
developed (2007: P = 048; 2008: F1,15 = 1004, P = 0006;
2009: F1,15 = 1235, P = 0003; 2010: F1,15 = 505, P = 004).
Average invertebrate taxa richness generally increased in all
wetlands throughout the duration of the study, but most
fish-free wetlands were consistently richer during all sampling
periods (Fig. 5).
The rarefied richness curves illustrate the higher individual
abundances in fish-free wetlands, but they also reveal
that in 2007 and 2009, taxa richness reached levels in fishstocked
wetlands nearly as high as in those without fish,
even though fewer individuals were captured (Fig. 6a).
Because the rarefaction curves for fish treatments fail to
approach an asymptote, and vastly different numbers of
individuals were captured in the two treatments, we also
plotted rarefied richness based on samples (Fig. 6b). The
sample-based curves suggest that taxa richness was somewhat
higher within fish-free wetlands, but during 2007,
taxa richness was similar for the two treatments across
samples and in 2010, taxa richness was nearly equal at
samples below 10.
A Wilcoxon signed rank test revealed a statistically significant
increase in invertebrate abundance (excluding
crayfish, daphniids, snails and bivalves) following rotenone
applications to fish-stocked wetlands, N = 12,
Z = 220, P = 003, with a large effect size (r = 064).
The median invertebrate abundance in fish-stocked wetlands
was 505 in 2009 prior to treatment. In 2010, after
treatment, the median increased to 2485. Invertebrate
abundances were low in the three untreated fish-stocked
wetlands in 2009 and 2010 (2009: mean = 340,
range = 22ñ49; 2010: mean = 283, range = 17ñ35).
There was also a statistically significant increase in
invertebrate taxa richness following rotenone application 


to fish-stocked wetlands, N = 12, Z = 203, P = 004,
with effect size r = 059. The median richness in fishstocked
wetlands was 75 in 2009 prior to treatment, and
in 2010, after treatment, the median increased to 115.
However, invertebrate taxa richness also increased in the
three untreated fish-stocked wetlands from 2009 to 2010
(2009: mean = 87, range = 7ñ10; 2010: mean 113,
range = 9ñ13). xdiscussion
 Our results illustrate the dramatic role aquatic predators
play in wetland community development. While natural
predators altered amphibian communities over time,
introduced mosquitofish impeded community development
from the outset. Chorus frogs and grey treefrogs appeared
to be particularly sensitive to mosquitofish and our results
may reflect avoidance by breeding adults, predation, trophic
effects or a combination thereof. Nevertheless, metamorph
production data recorded at the same wetlands
during 2007 and 2008 using terrestrial pitfall traps and
drift fences reinforce our results (Shulse et al. 2012).
Although some models in this study revealed negative
influences on hylids from invertebrate predators, none
were as consistent as those observed for mosquitofish.
Our wetlands contained water during all four study
years. As a result, wetlands without mosquitofish
developed high populations of invertebrate predators and
by 2010, almost all contained ranid larvae. Heightened
competition from ranids (Faragher & Jaeger 1998; Boone,
Semlitsch & Mosby 2008) and susceptibility to invertebrate
predators (Skelly 1995; Smith & Van Buskirk 1995)
may explain why larval chorus frogs were nearly absent
by 2009. Some hylids can detect fish and invertebrate
predators in wetlands (Resetarits & Wilbur 1989, 1991;
Binkley & Resetarits 2008). During diurnal early spring
reconnaissance trips in 2007 and 2008, chorus frogs called
selectively from fish-free wetlands, but in 2009, chorusing
had nearly ceased in all wetlands. Instead, frogs chorused
from nearby ephemeral swales and ditches (Shulse, personal
observation). Chorus frogs prefer fish-free wetlands
with vegetation (Shulse et al. 2010, 2012), but dragonflies also appear to prefer similar habitat (Table 2). Dragonfly
populations increased as wetlands aged (Fig. 7c), as did
vegetation cover (See Fig. S1, Supporting Information).
By 2009, chorus frogs may have avoided the wetlands,
even those with high cover, in favour of nearby ephemeral,
low-cover aquatic habitat containing few predators
and little competition. During 2010, chorusing frogs
returned in limited numbers, but mostly to chemically
restored wetlands (Shulse, personal observation). Our chorusing
observations were validated by capture results. In
2010, the highest abundances of chorus frogs were captured
in wetlands that were either 1) chemically restored
prior to the breeding season or 2) had relatively low predatory
insect populations, illustrating that these anurans
detect both fish and invertebrate predators. Other studies
have shown that fish removal leads to increased breeding
of fish-sensitive anurans (BrÄonmark & Edenhamn 1994;
Vredenburg 2004). Early colonizing amphibians may have a hierarchy of breeding habitat preferences with fish
avoidance as the strongest filter, followed by aquatic
invertebrate predators. Based on the results of Shulse
et al. (2012), this hierarchy can be extended below invertebrate
predators to include vegetation cover followed by
within-wetland slope. Our observations suggest that the
primary habitat trade-off for breeding chorus frogs is
between exposure to predators and subjection to breeding
site stochasticity.
Grey treefrogs were also less abundant in fish-stocked
wetlands, but they were able to persist in fish-free
wetlands throughout the duration of the study. Their high
numbers during 2007 indicate that they, like chorus
frogs, are early colonizers that prefer wetlands with low
predator levels. Adult female grey treefrogs will minimize
predation risk to their eggs and larvae by avoiding wetlands
containing fish (Binkley & Resetarits 2008). However,
larvae will often develop bright red pigment on their
tails and altered body shape in the presence of high populations
of aquatic invertebrate predators (McCollum &
Leimberger 1997). This ëdragonfly morphí appears less
susceptible to invertebrates than the typical morph
(McCollum & Van Buskirk 1996) and may indirectly contribute
to their ability to continue to breed in permanent
wetlands. We often observed ëdragonfly morphí grey treefrog
larvae in our wetlands with varying shades and
amounts of red pigment. Because these anurans are midspring
to early summer breeders whose larvae emerge during
mid- to late summer, highly ephemeral wetlands that
become dry by mid-summer may reduce or eliminate
recruitment. However, breeding later in more permanent
wetlands may expose larvae to the highest seasonal levels
of dragonflies.
The increasing abundance of green frogs over the duration
of the study, like invertebrates, probably reflects
hydroperiod. Green frogs overwinter as larvae and therefore
require permanent or semi-permanent wetlands.
Green frogs were negatively associated with crayfish,
although it is not clear whether this reflects mortality or
avoidance. Anderson & Brown (2009) observed reduced
hatching of green frogs in the presence of crayfish, even
when the crayfish had no direct access to the eggs. Interestingly,
many sparsely vegetated wetlands contained high
populations of crayfish. The negative correlations between
crayfish and vegetation (Table 2) illustrate the effects that
these shredders have upon aquatic vegetation. These
effects, in addition to predation, may explain the negative
associations between crayfish and anurans. Green frog
abundances were never significantly negatively associated
with mosquitofish, perhaps reflective of their ability to
persist with fish. However, they did not appear to be facilitated
by fish as has been demonstrated for bullfrog tadpoles
(Werner & McPeek 1994; Adams, Pearl & Bury
2003).
While our study did not reveal strong associations
between most anurans and vegetation, grey treefrogs were
strongly positively associated in 2007, perhaps reflecting
the sparse vegetation present at the time. Treefrogs may
have used the planted cordgrass for chorusing or cover.
We also found strong positive associations between total
amphibian metamorph production and vegetation cover
during 2008 at the same wetlands (Shulse et al. 2012). Chorus frog metamorph production during 2008 was also
positively associated with vegetation cover, but a model
that combined mosquitofish abundance with vegetation
cover best explained chorus frog abundance that year
(Shulse et al. 2012). Habitat complexity may increase in
importance, surpassing other features such as withinwetland
slope, as wetlands age (Shulse et al. 2012). Studies
have shown that high vegetation cover is important
for tadpole survival (Babbitt & Tanner 1998; Baber &
Babbitt 2004), but predators that easily penetrate dense
vegetation may have lowered the importance of cover in
our models. For some anurans, predator population
crashes (and manipulations that directly alter predator
levels) may be more important modifiers of reproductive
success than habitat alterations. Our results for invertebrates are concordant with those of
previous studies that have demonstrated that mosquitofish
are injurious to aquatic invertebrates (i.e. Hurlbert, Zedler
& Fairbanks 1972; Jassby et al. 1977a,b; Lawler et al.
1999). Mosquitofish may alter aquatic communities by
selectively feeding on large zooplankton reducing pressure
on smaller zooplankton species, phytoplankton and bacteria
(Jassby et al. 1977a,b). Studies suggest mosquitofish
are primarily zooplanktivores (Garcia-Berthou 1999;
Reynolds 2009) and may prefer zooplankton to larval
amphibians (Reynolds 2009). We captured a total of 5
daphniids in Sears 1 during sampling period 2010ñ1 after
chemical restoration which nearly eliminated mosquitofish.
None were captured during subsequent sampling
periods when the fish population recovered, or at any
other fish-stocked wetland during the study. After autumn
rotenone treatments in 2009 at other wetlands, daphniid
captures increased during the following spring to the highest
levels recorded (C. D. Shulse & R. D. Semlitsch,
unpublished data). Because daphnia are preyed upon by
other invertebrates, high abundances shortly after fish
removal may reflect ideal conditions before predator populations
recover.
Our rarefied richness curves (Fig. 6) and invertebrate
taxa captured (Table S1, Supporting information) illustrate
that most taxa present in fish-free wetlands were also
present in those with fish, although many at comparatively
very low numbers. This suggests that our ANCOVA
results illustrating lower richness in fish-stocked wetlands,
along with differences in mean richness between the two
treatments (Fig. 5), may be partly explained by mosquitofish
reducing richness simply through reducing abundance
(i.e. a sampling effect). Culicids, chironomids, gerrids,
amphipods and hydrachnids were also very rare in
fish-stocked wetlands. Unlike daphnia, these were also relatively
uncommon in fish-free wetlands. Mosquitofish
likely prefer daphnia, but they appear to prey indiscriminately
on most aquatic invertebrates once daphnia populations
are depleted.
Stewart & Downing (2008) found macroinvertebrate
richness and abundance increased along with vegetation
in constructed wetlands. While our results also indicate
that invertebrate richness is bolstered by vegetation, we
found no evidence that vegetation increased overall
invertebrate abundance. Reynolds (2009) found that high
levels of both aquatic invertebrates and vegetation cover
reduced mosquitofish predation on anuran larvae. However,
our results illustrate that aquatic invertebrate
abundance is severely reduced by mosquitofish, suggesting
vegetation cover provided insufficient refuge for
invertebrates. Complex interactions between predators, wetland hydroperiod
and successional processes shape wetland communities,
but mosquitofish break down natural processes,
alter populations of other predators and grazers and
impact multiple trophic levels. Our results suggest that
outside their native range and ecosystems, mosquitofish
reduce the ecological value and conservation potential of
wetlands, particularly those restored or created as compensatory
mitigation for the destruction of natural wetlands.
Some invertebrates and amphibians responded
positively to both fish removal and low invertebrate predator
populations. These conditions are likely to be similar
to those that occur when a wetland re-fills after drying.
However, rotenone can have negative consequences for
amphibians (Fontenot, Noblet & Platt 1994) so caution is
warranted.
Building wetlands of varying sizes and depths creates
hydroperiod diversity across the landscape similar to
natural conditions (Semlitsch 2002; Petranka et al. 2007;
Shoo et al. 2011), and constructing drainable ponds will
allow managers to control hydroperiods. These nontoxic
approaches will ensure that mosquitofish and
other aquatic predators are occasionally eliminated in
some pools, thereby increasing the ecological value of
restored and constructed wetland complexes. Furthermore,
native predators should be encouraged to colonize
through management regimes that mimic presettlement
conditions and natural successional processes.
However, non-native predators can have devastating
impacts and they should not be stocked or allowed to
persist.
Our experimental approach at replicated environments
goes beyond traditional laboratory or observational investigations
to provide a unique comparison between the
impacts of an invasive introduced predator to those of
naturally colonizing predators. We encourage researchers,
ecologists and managers to work collaboratively to incorporate
experimentation into restoration projects. Doing so
will yield valuable information that will improve the ecological
value of restoration projects, reduce the threat of
invasive species and increase the conservation potential of
restored habitats.