xabstract Dispersal can limit the ranges of species and the
diversity of communities. Despite its importance, little is
known about its role in freshwater habitats and its relation
to habitat type (lentic vs. lotic), especially for organisms
with cryptic dispersal methods such as plankton. Poor dispersers
are expected to show more clumped distributions or
greater spatial autocorrelation (SA) in community composition
than good dispersers. We examined patterns of SA
across freshwater taxa with diVerent dispersal modes
(active vs. passive) and their association with habitat type
(lake vs. stream) using 18 spatially explicit community
composition data sets. We found signiWcant relationships
between SA and body size among taxa in lake habitats, but
not in streams. However, the increase in SA with body size
in lakes was driven entirely by Wshesóorganisms ranging
in size from diatoms to macro-invertebrates showed equivalent
levels of SA. These results support the idea that large
organisms are less eVective dispersers in aquatic environments,
resulting in greater SA in community structure over
broad scales. Streams may be eVectively more connected
than lakes as patterns of SA and body size were weaker in
lotic habitats. Our data suggest that the critical threshold
where greater body size increases dispersal limitation
seems to come at the juncture between invertebrates and
vertebrates rather than that between unicellular and multicellular
organisms as has been previously suggested. 


xintroduction 


Dispersal among habitats is a cornerstone of modern ecological
theory, and underpins the large body of work
devoted to the study of population dynamics (Bilton et al.
2001; Hanski and Gilpin 1997; Palmer et al. 1996), biogeography
and community structure (Hubbell 2001;
MacArthur and Wilson 1967). The scale and pattern of dispersal
has important implications for evolution (Palumbi
1994), population genetics (Grosberg and Cunningham
2001) and community composition (Hillebrand and
Blenckner 2002; Mouquet and Loreau 2002). Dispersal
limitation is often treated as an alternative explanation for
patterns of biological diversity to local selective processes
(Ricklefs 2004). The critical distinction among several
competing theories of broad-scale community ecology
hinges on whether dispersal rates are high relative to local
extinction or demographic rates, and whether dispersal
occurs broadly or only within a spatially restricted neighborhood (Leibold et al. 2004). Information on the
frequency, range, and factors aVecting dispersal is thus
essential to understanding many ecological and evolutionary
processes.
Dispersal can have profound eVects on population and
community structure at local and regional scales. Low
dispersal probabilities may limit membership in local
communities, therefore increasing habitat connectivity
may result in enhanced within-patch diversity (Debinski
and Holt 2000). However, suYciently high levels of dispersal
may sustain sink populations that exclude other
species and thereby reduce local diversity, leading to
maximal local diversity at intermediate dispersal rates
(Mouquet and Loreau 2002). Increasing dispersal is also
expected to enhance similarity among sites and reduce
beta diversity or species turnover among habitat patches.
Since dispersal occurs over restricted spatial scales in all
organisms, similarity in community composition declines
with increasing distance among habitats (Condit et al.
2002; Gilbert and Lechowicz 2004; Nekola and White
1999; Tuomisto et al. 2003). The change in community
structure with spatial separation is analogous to ìisolation
by distanceî in population genetics, a measure which
has often been used to infer rates of gene Xow among
populations (Slatkin 1993).
Despite the importance of dispersal in structuring populations
and communities, surprisingly little is known about
the extent, rates and mechanisms of dispersal in freshwater
invertebrates (Bilton et al. 2001). DiYculties in measuring
dispersal rates arise due to the cryptic nature of the dispersive
stages and the lack of obvious dispersal mechanisms in
many aquatic taxa. However, it may be reasonable to
expect that dispersal constrains the distributions of many
freshwater organisms due to the uninhabitable matrix surrounding
lakes and streams. Recent reviews of dispersal in
freshwater micro-invertebrates arrived at contrasting conclusions
about the importance of dispersal limitation in
plankton communities. De Meester et al. (2002) and Havel
and Shurin (2004) concluded that zooplankton have high
dispersal rates such that local selection processes are most
important for shaping populations and communities. Bohonak
and Jenkins (2003) questioned the generality of these
conclusions and argued that the importance of dispersal for
limiting the distributions of many taxa is unknown. Data on
the importance of dispersal for constraining distributions of
species or genotypes comes from patterns of morphology of
surface scales of Paraphysomonas (Finlay and Clarke
1999), community composition (Cottenie et al. 2003; Pinel-
Alloul et al. 1995), experimental studies of colonization
(Allen 2007; C·ceres and Soluk 2002; Cohen and Shurin
2003; Jenkins and Buikema 1998) and invasion (Cottenie
and De Meester 2004; Havel et al. 2002; Shurin 2000) and
the recovery of lakes from past perturbations (Sarnelle and
Knapp 2004). The importance of dispersal for patterns of
diversity, ecosystem processes and food web structure in
aquatic habitats remains much less understood than the role
of local interactions.
Contrary to plankton, Wsh and other aquatic vertebrates
are largely obligate active dispersers through surface
waters, and as such may be more inXuenced by direct
aquatic connectivity patterns compared to planktonic
organisms or macro-invertebrates. Isolation and extinction
dynamics are both important structuring factors in lake
and stream Wsh communities (Jackson et al. 2001; Magnuson
et al. 1998; Olden et al. 2001; Tonn et al. 1990). Isolation
is likely more diYcult to overcome for Wsh in lake
systems than rivers due to reduced potential for dispersal
through Xowing surface waters. In streams, isolation is
often approximated as continuous variables such as stream
size and Xow variability that may impede dispersal to
diVering degrees (Taylor and Warren 2001). In lake Wsh
communities, isolation is often determined by dispersal
across the terrestrial landscape through stream connections,
human Wsh stocking, or past post-glacial lakes. For
instance, six lakes in Wisconsin are still Wshless after the
last glaciers receded ª10.000 years ago, although each
appears capable of supporting Wsh (Magnuson et al. 1998).
Many high elevation lakes are historically Wshless yet able
to support stocked salmonids, indicating that barriers to
dispersal impeded colonization in the past (Knapp et al.
2001).
DiVerences in dispersal modes suggest that larger organisms
may be more constrained by dispersal than smaller
taxa. First, micro-organisms are often asexual and therefore
less susceptible to Allee eVects or negative density dependence
at low population sizes (Sarnelle and Knapp 2004).
Many zooplankton and phytoplankton also have dormant
life history stages that may be transported via wind or animal
vectors and allow populations to be resurrected following
local extinctions. In addition, large organisms support
smaller local population sizes (Cohen et al. 2003) that may
be more vulnerable to local extinction and provide fewer
propagules for colonization. Finlay and colleagues (Finlay
2002; Finlay and Clarke 1999; Finlay et al. 2002) proposed
that most free-living, microbial eukaryotes and prokaryotes
have global distributions, whereas larger taxa show more
restricted geographical ranges. Based on these data, Finlay
(2002) proposed a hypothetical model relating body length
to ubiquity or dispersal limitation. To test this idea, Hillebrand
et al. (2001) compared beta diversity of unicellular
versus multicellular groups and found that the multicellular
taxa showed more clumped distributions and weaker species-
area relations, consistent with lower dispersal rates.
However, Hillebrand et al. (2001) compared organisms
from very diVerent habitats (e.g., coral reefs vs. lakes). The
question of whether body size (or dispersal mechanism) and relative dispersal rates are correlated in freshwater
communities remains unresolved.
We used 18 data sets on species distribution from a large
number of lakes and streams in North America and Europe
to examine patterns of beta diversity with distance among
freshwater organisms. We used the slope of the distancerelated
increase in community dissimilarity (similarity
decay, Nekola and White 1999) as a measure of multivariate
spatial autocorrelation (SA) (Legendre and Legendre 1998)
in species composition. SA is related to dispersal ability
(Bolker and Pacala 1999; Tilman et al. 1997), with poor dispersers
showing more clumped distributions than those that
move rapidly among habitats. However, SA in species distributions
may also be driven by spatial cohesion in local environmental
conditions among sites (Legendre 1993; Nekola
and White 1999). Thus, patterns of SA across taxa may be
related to diVerences in how organisms respond to local conditions.
We selected studies spanning a large spatial scale
(>1,000 km between the most distant sites) where environmental
heterogeneity is substantial for all taxa. Because Wsh
dispersal is inXuenced by hydrologic connectivity, we predicted
that Wsh communities will be more dispersal limited
in lakes than rivers, and consequently that the SA of lake
Wshes will be greater than those in streams. If plankton are
not dispersal limited because of eYcient passive dispersal,
their SA should be low compared to that of Wsh. If unicellular
organisms are the most eVective dispersers, then microalgae
should show the least SA. Finally, we predicted that SA
for macroinvertebrates with active dispersal mechanisms
should be in between those of Wsh and plankton. We thus
speciWcally tested the predictions that: (1) the size of aquatic
organisms is related to the degree of SA in lake communities,
and (2) this relation is weaker for organisms in streams
than those in lakes since the lotic environment may be eVectively
less isolated for its inhabitants.
In addition to these two biological hypotheses, we also
tested the inXuence of three important statistical issues in
the computation of SA of biological communities: the use
of the mean versus the extreme low values of similarity for
a given distance class, since the range of similarities
observed varied with distance; the consequences of diVerences
in species richness between group of organisms; and
the sensitivity of the SA computations to the temporal scale
of the survey (integrated over several years vs. snapshot
samples within years). xmethods

 We collected data sets on several groups of freshwater taxa
from a variety of published and unpublished sources. The
data requirements were that: (1) the sites were distributed
over a large spatial extent (>1,000 km between the most
distant sites); and (2) spatial location of the sites was
known, together with at least presence-absence data of
taxon composition. Table S1 in the Electronic supplementary
material (ESM) gives an overview of the data sets
used, the origin, and their main characteristics. In every
data set, we removed taxa with uncertain taxon determinations
(unknown species or life stages), and also removed
sites with missing spatial data.
We computed the dissimilarity between two sites based on
their species presence-absence with the Jaccard index
(Legendre and Legendre 1998). We calculated the geographic
distance between two sites as the great circle distance
from latitude-longitude data. The great circle distance
is the shortest distance between two points on the earthís
surface. The spatial data for the Wsh data from Sweden were
in xñy coordinates (universal transverse Mercator coordinate
system), and for those data we computed the Euclidean
distances between the diVerent sites (not accounting for the
curvature of the earthís surface). For every data set, we calculated
the dissimilarity in species composition for every
pair of sites and the distance in kilometers. SA was deWned
as the slope of the regression line between the logarithm of
dissimilarity in community composition (Jaccardís) and
distance. Thus, we Wt a model with an exponential rate of
decay, the form of the relationship which most often provides
the best Wt to data of this type (Nekola and White
1999).
The plots of dissimilarity versus distance formed wedgeshaped
clouds with high variance at low distances, and low
variance at high distances. This caused two problems with
using a regression of all the data points to determine the
slope of the relationship. First, most of the points occur at
small distances, giving more weight to small distances.
Second, the distribution of the dissimilarity values at a
given distance might be a better indicator of dispersal limitation
than the mean dissimilarity. For instance, imagine
that 70% of the dissimilarities lie between 0.9 and 1.0, but
that the lower 30% of the dissimilarities cover a range of
0.1ñ0.9 for the shorter distances, while the lower 30% falls
between 0.8 and 0.9 at long distances. The slope of the
regression line between dissimilarity and distance (SA) in
this example is inXuenced mainly by the points in the 0.9ñ
1.0 range, and would be low. However, SA is clearly present,
but is only apparent from the lower 30% of dissimilarity
values. To deal with this issue, we divided the
logarithmically transformed distances into 50 equal size
classes and computed both the overall mean of the logtransformed
dissimilarity, and the mean of the lower 30% of the dissimilarities for each distance class. We then
regressed both measures of dissimilarity on the middle
point of the distance class. This approach eliminated both
the problems of giving unequal weight to diVerent distances
and the unequal variation in dissimilarity across the distance
gradient. We used the slope of the regression line as a
measure of SA. We called the slope of the regression line
based on the lower 30% dissimilarities per distance bin
ìsensitive SAî. This measure is more sensitive to detecting
potential relationships between distance and dissimilarity
because it focuses just on the sites showing the greatest
contrasts in species composition.
Total taxon richness varied considerably among groups
(e.g., 30 Wsh species vs. 1,255 benthic macro-invertebrate
taxa), and may inXuence the computation of dissimilarity.
We therefore repeated the previous analysis after standardizing
the number of taxa for calculating the dissimilarity
values by rarefaction. For data sets with more than 50 taxa,
we generated 100 data sets of 50 randomly selected taxa
from each survey, and computed 100 new slope values. The
mean of these 100 new slopes are a measure of SA standardized
for diVerences in richness between taxonomic
groups. If patterns of SA are independent of diVerences in
overall richness, then rarefying to the minimum number of
taxa should not inXuence our results.
Finally, we also tested whether temporal sampling intensity
inXuenced the patterns of SA with respect to body size
or habitat. ìIntegrated SAî considered regression slopes
from data sets with species composition determined as the
total number of species observed over several years of sampling.
ìDirect SAî considered only the regression slopes
comparing species composition in single samples per site
taken in the same limited time period (<1 year). We might
expect integrated SA to be lower than direct SA if the timeintegrated
samples increased the chances of encountering
species due to longer periods for dispersal between sites to
take place (Shurin et al. 2007). Integrated SA increases the
number of species found in a particular site due to the ubiquitous
species-time relationship.
We computed the signiWcance for all estimates of SA by
linear regression. The use of distance bins and mean dissimilarities
broke the interdependence between the diVerent
points, and prohibited the use of Mantel tests to determine
the signiWcance. We tested hypotheses about eVects of body
size on SA with regressions of regular and sensitive SA on
the body mass of the organisms (in log grams wet weight)
obtained from published sources (Hillebrand 2004). Even
though mean body mass is a coarse measure with large
within-group variance, this will not aVect our results due to
the 10 orders of magnitude variation in body size separating
the smallest and largest organisms, spanning the range from
diatoms to Wshes. If dispersal is less limiting for small
organisms, then we predict that all measures of SA will
increase with body size. We compared the signiWcance of
these regressions for lakes and streams in order to address
hypothesis 2. We performed these analyses for both the
integrated and direct SA. Moreover, for studies with both
integrated and direct SA estimates, we checked whether
integrated dispersal limitations were signiWcantly smaller
than direct SA with a one-sided paired t-test.
xresults Twenty-eight out of 36 surveys showed a signiWcant
increase in community dissimilarity among sites separated
by greater distances (see Tables S2, S3; Figs. S1, S2 in
ESM). Most organisms exhibited signiWcant SA, suggesting
an eVect of either dispersal limitation or spatially autocorrelated
environmental variation on community
composition. SA (the slope of the distance-dissimilarity
plot) showed considerable variation among surveys and
taxa. Larger taxa showed stronger SA than smaller organisms,
regardless of the measure used for SA. Both integrated
(Fig. 1) SA and direct SA (Fig. 2) increased
signiWcantly with body size for lake organisms, but not in
streams (hypotheses 1 and 2; Table S4). Although the
slopes for sensitive SA were higher than regular SA (Figs.
1, 2), both were signiWcantly positive regardless of the sensitivity
of the analyses.
Standardizing the surveys to the same number of taxa
before calculating dissimilarity did not alter the result with
regard to body size; the mean standardized slope was
highly correlated with the slopes computed from using all
the taxa (correlations coeYcients were between 0.91 and
0.98, and highly signiWcant; we only did the computations
for the integrated SA values; see Fig. S3 in ESM). Overall
taxonomic richness, therefore, did not inXuence the measure
of SA or the signiWcance of the relationship with body
size.
Contrary to the prediction from hypothesis 3, integrated
SA was not signiWcantly lower than direct SA values (SA
for lake organisms, integratedñdirect SA = 0.00005,
tdf=6 = 1.23, P = 0.86; sensitive SA for lake organisms, integratedñ
direct = 0.00002, tdf=6 = 1.02, P = 0.83; SA for
stream organisms, integratedñdirect = 0.0002, tdf=7 = 1.20,
P = 0.87; sensitive SA for stream organisms, integratedñ
direct = 0.0008, tdf=7 = 1.10, P = 0.84). This indicates that
the temporal period of sampling does not aVect the conclusions
regarding body size in either lakes or streams.
Since the data set contains no information on environmental
variables, we used indirect approaches to ask
whether the scale of environmental heterogeneity aVects 


our patterns of SA. First, it is possible that the above results
were caused by a larger taxa experiencing smaller scale
environment heterogeneity. Since the spatial scales of the
diVerent studies were very similar, this should translate into
higher beta diversity or greater average change in species
composition between habitats regardless of distance for
larger taxa. We computed average community dissimilarity
within each data set as a measure of beta diversity that is
independent of total regional diversity (Forbes and Chase
2002). Neither lakes nor streams showed any association
between body size and beta diversity (lakesí slope = °0.005,
tdf=7 = °1.2, P = 0.26; streamsí slope = 0.003, tdf=7 = 0.89,
P = 0.4). Second, it is possible that the positive relationship
between body size and SA is caused by larger taxa having
smaller species range sizes. We therefore computed the
average species ranges within each data set. The range of a
species was deWned as the maximum distance between two
sites occupied by that species. However, we found no signiWcant
relationship between body size and average species
range size (lakesí slope = 24.2, tdf=6 = 1.91, P = 0.11;
streamsí slope = °7.62, tdf=7 = °0.90, P = 0.4). These two
analyses suggest that patterns of SA and body size reXect
diVerent levels of dispersal limitation rather than variable
responses to environmental heterogeneity. xdiscussion
 Our results indicate that SA in community similarity is
greater for Wsh than invertebrates or micro-organisms in
lakes but not in streams. This result is consistent with the
hypothesis that the importance of dispersal limitation
increases with size among taxa. However, contrary to Finlay
(2002), we found that the pattern of increasing SA with
size was only evident when comparing vertebrates with
smaller organisms. Benthic macro-invertebrates, zooplankton
and phytoplankton showed similar levels of SA. This
result suggests that dispersal ability is lower in Wsh, but that
invertebrates and micro-organisms are similar in their dispersal
ability. Invertebrates and micro-organisms vary
widely in dispersal (active vs. passive) and reproductive
(sexual vs. asexual) modes. However, our results show that
organisms in the size range from unicellular phytoplankton
to macro-invertebrates show equivalent levels of SA, suggesting
similar degrees of dispersal limitation.
Fish may be subject to greater dispersal limitation for
any of several reasons. First, all of the taxa in our data set
are obligately sexual, thus subject to the potential for Allee
eVects or a negatively density-dependent growth rate at low
density. Allee eVects can slow the spread of invasion and
limit the geographic ranges (Amarasekare 1998). Sarnelle
and Knapp (2004) found that obligately sexual calanoid
copepods failed to recover after being driven to extinction
by stocked trout in California alpine lakes. By contrast,
cyclically parthenogenetic Daphnia re-established quickly
once Wsh stocking ended and Wsh populations became
extinct. Thus, an obligately sexual mode of reproduction
may subject Wsh to greater dispersal limitation. In addition,
body size is correlated positively with trophic position and
negatively with population size (Cohen et al. 2003). Small
local populations provide few individuals to serve as propagules
and colonize neighboring habitat. Finally, Wsh lack
terrestrial modes of dispersal, either through Xying adults or
dormant stages, either or both of which characterize the
invertebrate and phytoplankton taxa in our data set.
The similar levels of SA observed in organisms ranging
from diatoms to macro-invertebrates suggest that organisms
can employ a number of diVerent strategies to become
eVective dispersers. Most aquatic insects are obligately sexual
and lack dormant stages, but have complex life cycles with actively dispersing Xying adults. The adult stages may
account for the relatively broad distributions of these
organisms. Mollusks and crustaceans have no active dispersive
stages, and are sexual, but may have dormant stages or
be able to survive periods of desiccation as adults. Zooplankton
and phytoplankton are often asexual and have dormant
stages, but lack active dispersal stages. Passively
dispersing organisms in all habitats show lower beta diversity
(Soininen et al. 2007a) and Xatter distance decay of
similarity (Soininen et al. 2007b) than active dispersers,
suggesting that passive dispersal is in general more eVective.
All of these groups show similar levels of SA, suggesting
that these diVerences in life history and dispersal
strategies result in broadly similar levels of dispersal limitation.
However, these broad groupings may obscure considerable
variation in dispersal ability within groups. For
instance, some zooplankton are far more dispersal limited
than others (Shurin 2000), therefore broad generalities may
hide important exceptions within the designations chosen.
Our conclusions on the relation between dispersal limitation
and body size agree well with some elements of the
model proposed by Finlay (2002). Contrary to his model of
biogeographic ubiquity for small-bodied taxa, most of the
groups in our analyses showed signiWcant relationships
between dissimilarities and distance. Bacteria and microorganisms
show Xatter species-area relationships and lower
spatial turnover than metazoans, further suggesting greater
dispersal abilities (Green et al. 2004; Horner-Devine et al.
2004). However, the transition zone from weak to strong
SA in our data set occurs at a body size in between those of
the Wsh and macro-invertebrates, which is larger than the
threshold of 1 mm proposed by Finlay (2002). However,
the patterns are more in line with those shown by Fenchel
and Finlay (2004). They found that beta diversity (the proportion
of the global species pool observed in a site) was
unrelated to size for taxa spanning the range from heterotrophic
nano-Xagellates to nematodes and triclads (but
lower for mollusks) in an English pond. By contrast, marine
organisms from Denmark showed strong declines in beta
diversity with size across all levels. Thus, the ubiquity of
micro-organisms and endemism of those larger than 1 mm
may not be a universal feature of all communities. Lakes appear to be relatively more isolated and show
greater SA than streams, suggesting that the terrestrial landscape
may be more permeable to dispersers through
streams than among lakes. Although lakes may also be connected
along stream networks, many lentic taxa may be
unable to eVectively disperse through Xowing water. The
straight-line distance decay of similarity may not represent
the eVective distance separating diVerent stream communities
if most dispersal takes place through Xowing water. In
addition, many invertebrates in streams have Xying adult
stages, which may contribute to the apparently high connectivity
of lotic habitat. These results support others showing
habitat and geographic variation in beta diversity and
similarity decay, consistent with diVerences among ecosystems
in the importance of dispersal limitation (Soininen
et al. 2007a, b).
The results shed some light in the question of whether
zooplankton are signiWcantly limited in their distributions
by dispersal (Bohonak and Jenkins 2003; De Meester et al.
2002; Havel and Shurin 2004). Patterns of SA across freshwater
taxa support the idea that plankton communities in
lake ecosystems are not strongly dispersal limited. Zooplankton
showed relatively low levels of SA, comparable
with other micro-organisms and smaller than those of Wsh.
We found that direct dispersal limitation was not consistently
higher than integrated dispersal limitation, indicating
that the time-scale of observation did not aVect this conclusion.
Although micro- and macro-invertebrates and phytoplankton
in general showed lower SA than Wshes, these
broad taxonomic groupings likely contain organisms that
vary considerably in their dispersal abilities. For instance,
obligately sexual copepods may be more dispersal limited
than asexual cladocerans (Sarnelle and Knapp 2004).
Macro-invertebrates also include a wide range of taxa, from
insects with Xying adults to snails and amphipods that lack
obvious dispersal strategies. Despite the broad life history,
morphological and behavioral diVerences among taxa
within groups, our results indicate consistent variation
resulting in greater dispersal limitation in Wshes than other
aquatic organisms.
Our results using SA as an indicator of the degree of dispersal
limitation are consistent with other evidence showing
that larger aquatic taxa have a harder time moving
through the landscape. However, organisms may also show
SA as a consequence of responses to biotic or abiotic conditions
that are themselves spatially correlated (Legendre
1993). Similar problems arise when using genetic distance
to infer dispersal rates in that identical patterns may be generated
by SA in local selective factors imposed by the environment
(De Meester et al. 2002). It is possible that our
patterns relating SA and body size are driven by diVerences
in how small and large organisms respond to environmental
constraints. That is, large taxa may be more sensitive to
environmental factors that show greater autocorrelation.
However, at the large sample scale of our study (>1,000 km
between sites), environmental heterogeneity will be substantial
for all taxa, independent of body size. It is conceivable
that Wsh respond to particular environmental factors
that show more aggregated spatial patterns, but we can
think of no reason why this would be the case. By contrast,
a number of aspects of the biology of vertebrates should
lead to greater dispersal limitation. We therefore consider it
likely that our measure of SA is a reXection of dispersal
abilities of diVerent groups rather than sensitivity to local
environmental factors that show diVerent spatial patterns.
The evidence for similar dispersal rates between sites for
zooplankton, phytoplankton and macro-invertebrates has
important consequences in terms of metacommunity
dynamics. The relative importance of habitat heterogeneity
versus dispersal in generating geographic variation in community
structure is the distinction between species sorting
and the island biogeographic perspective (Leibold et al.
2004). Our results suggest that most aquatic invertebrates
experience enough dispersal to sort themselves out among
environments across broad distances. Pinel-Alloul et al.
(1995) studied lakes at a similar scale to this study, and
found important relations between local environmental
variables and zooplankton community composition, independent
from spatial variables, suggesting that at that scale
dispersal is not limited, but also not suYcient to result in
source-sink dynamics. Cottenie et al. (2003) studied ponds
in a much smaller area and tightly interconnected to each
other (up to 7,000 dispersing individuals per hour between
two ponds, Michels et al. 2001), and found at these very
high dispersal rates some eVects of mass transport on zooplankton
community structure, but still very strong species
sorting eVects.
Our analyses suggest that SA in freshwater organisms is
partly related to body size. This result is consistent with the
idea that smaller organisms are less constrained by dispersal
limitation than bigger ones. However, it is still very
diYcult to associate SA with actual dispersal rates quanti-
Wed as individuals per time period per area. The next step is
to develop mechanistic models relating SA to measured
Weld dispersal rates. The power of the relation between size
and dispersal is that body size is a much easier trait to measure
at the species level than dispersal ability. If dispersal is
actually closely related to size, then it may be possible to
generate spatially explicit metapopulation models based on
information about size. One complication of using SA as an
indicator of dispersal rates is that SA reXects both colonization
and dispersal processes. Integrating aspects of the
physical environment into spatial models of species distributions
should in principle allow more sophisticated tests
of hypotheses about the eVects of dispersal and local selection
on patterns of species turnover (Cottenie 2005). In addition, organismal traits other than body size may aVect
dispersal ability and therefore turnover. The roles of environmental
Wltering and the traits of species in determining
spatial patterns are likely to be useful topics for future
research on discerning the imprint of dispersal limitation on
community structure.