xabstract
Background and aims The spread of invasive plants in wetlands associated with human activity has become a serious environmental problem because of the negative effects of these species on biodiversity and biogeochem- istry in ecosystems. Unlike their impacts on above- ground biodiversity, the responses of soil microbial communities and related soil characteristics to invasive plants are largely unknown. In this study, we assessed the structural and functional responses of soil microor- ganisms and belowground biogeochemistry to the inva- sion of Phragemites australis, which has heavily invad- ed in wetland areas globally, in brackish marsh areas in Korea.
Methods We measured soil biogeochemical characteris- tics including extracellular enzyme activities and
 microbial community structure (t-RFLP) in the marsh, both undisturbed and invaded areas over a year period. Results We found higher extracellular enzyme activity in invaded areas compared to the undisturbed region dominated by the native species Scirpus planiculmis, and this response was profound during the growing season. Fungal and bacterial community structure, ana- lyzed by terminal-restriction fragment length polymor- phism, indicated that invasion by Phragmites had little effect on these communities. However, significantly higher microbial diversity was found in intermediately invaded areas in which Scirpus and Phragmites were co-dominant.
Conclusions This result suggests that microbial diversi- ty was affected by plant diversity, rather than invasion by or presence of a particular species. Our results sug- gest that physicochemical conditions related to domi- nant plant species alter microbial activity, while plant diversity is a more important regulator of microbial community structure and diversity.

xintroduction
The expansion of invasive plant species has caused striking modifications of natural ecosystems that threat- en ecosystem services (Gordon 1998). Invasive plants are characterized by high productivity associated with several mechanisms including greater nutrient use effi- ciency, early maturation, and allelopathy (Ruiz and Carlton 2003; Callaway et al. 2004). Many invasive species are tolerant of or even adapted to environmental disturbance, which is likely to accelerate their expansion (Mitchell and Gopal 1991). As a result, they often displace native species, resulting in the loss of plant diversity (Mack et al. 2000), which in turn, weaken the stability and functioning of ecosystems (Loreau et al. 2001). Higher trophic levels such as fish, insect, and bird populations and their migration patterns are also negatively affected by degraded habitat quality associ- ated with aggressive plant invasions (e.g., Mensing et al. 1998; Hierro and Callaway 2003).
Wetlands, including brackish marshes, represent some of the most productive natural ecosystems (Mitsch and Gosselink 2007). Wetlands support various biological communities and biogeochemical functions by providing heterogeneous nutrient conditions and di- verse habitats, and they are key drivers of global nutrient cycling (Costanza et al. 1997; Mitsch and Gosselink 2007). Topographic features of wetlands, such as their location in natural depressions and their frequent con- nectivity to both terrestrial and aquatic systems, make these ecosystems vulnerable to anthropogenic distur- bances (Zedler and Kercher 2004) and can facilitate the invasion of non-native plants.
Phragmites spp. are among the most aggressive and widely studied invasive plants in wetlands. They signif- icantly modify and often destroy native ecosystem struc- ture and functions (e.g., Mills et al. 1996; McCormick et al. 2010). Physiological characteristics of Phragmites including high rates of reproduction, well-developed aerenchyma and rhizosphere facilitate colonization, and dense canopies of Phragmites related to their high productivity can inhibit germination and growth of other plant species (Meyerson et al. 2000; Mozdzer and Zieman 2010; Guo et al. 2013). Given the different tissue chemistry of Phragmites from native plant com- munities, their extensive invasion alters nutrient pools and availability in soils (Meyerson et al. 2000). Greater biomass and different decomposition rates can cause changes in organic matter accumulation that may lead to further topographic and hydrologic changes (Ehrenfeld 2003). The invasion and expansion of Phragmites spp in wetlands has been also considered as an emerging source of greenhouse gas emissions (Tong et al. 2012; Mozder and Megonigal 2013), be- cause greenhouse gas production and transport through
plant aerenchyma account for more than 80 % of total emissions of these gases in wetlands (Van der Nat and Middelburg 2000; Laanbroek 2010).
Ecosystem-level changes in wetland biogeochemis- try affected by the spread of invasive plants can result from microbial responses to plant invasions, since many ecosystem functions are mediated by soil microbial communities (Kourtev et al. 2002; Ravit et al. 2003). Plant invasion act as an environmental disturbance low- ering overall extracellular enzyme activity (Dick and Tabatabai 1993; Ravit et al. 2003). On the other hand, some studies have reported that plant invasions supplied additional organic matter and oxygen to soil and in- creased denitrification and enzyme (especially phospha- tase) activities (Bodelier et al. 1996; Allison et al. 2006). Contrasting responses of microbial biomass and com- munity structure to plant invasion have also been ob- served (Ravit et al. 2003; Broz et al. 2007). We suspected that such inconsistent findings regarding soil microbial communities among previous studies could be resulted, at least in part, from failing to control for effects of plant diversity; some uninvaded (often undis- turbed) areas contained a relatively high diversity of native plants, while invaded ecosystems were dominat- ed by fewer species. In addition, high spatial variability in physicochemical characteristics between invaded and uninvaded areas can compound the influence of inva- sive plants, leading inconsistent results of previous studies.
In this study, we examined how invasion of a brack- ish wetland by Phragmites australis would affect mi- crobial activity and community structure. To minimize the effects of differences in plant diversity and spatial heterogeneity between study sites, we compared soil characteristics and microbial properties in an undis- turbed area dominated by one native species (Scirpus planiculmis) with an area dominated by P. australis, located close to the undisturbed area.

xmethods
Site description
The Seongdong wetland is a brackish marsh (a major wetland type in Korea) located northeast of Seoul (37°46′N, 126°40′E). Plant diversity is low in this marsh given that the plant community is dominated by one native perennial sedge, Scirpus planiculmis. Seongdong brackish marshes have undergone extensive invasion by Phragmites australis since the early 2000s. Phragmites has spread in small patches into marshes from terrestrial edges and expanded the coverage from these patches. The relative areas covered by S. planiculmis decreased continuously from 12 % in 2003 to less than 1 % in 2008 (Ministry of Environment Korea 2009), which have been gradually replaced by P. australis.
We selected three sampling sites separated by <20 m that contained different dominant plant communities. These areas included: 1) native sites which are undis- turbed and dominated by native Scirpus; 2) mixed sites, co-dominated by Scirpus and Phragmites; and 3) invad- ed sites, heavily colonized by Phragmites. To match the plant diversity between native and invaded sites, we selected locations where over 70 % of surface area was covered by those species, with 90 % or higher coverage in triplicate sampling quadrats (0.5 × 0.5 m). Mixed sites were selected where these two species were relatively evenly distributed and overall coverage of surface area by two species was over 70 %.
Soil sampling and physicochemical analyses
Sampling was conducted in October 2006 and every month in 2007 from January to August with the excep- tion of March. Rhizosphere soils (approximately 10– 30 cm below the soil surface) were collected once per month from triplicate quadrats (0.5 × 0.5 m) in each site. To examine the extent of difference in site characteris- tics induced by the introduction of Phragmites, both plant growing season (spring-summer) and winter sea- son (Jan. and Feb.) samplings were conducted. During the sampling period, the climate of the sampling loca- tions followed a general temperate weather as is in Korea, characterized by hot and wet summer with dry winter. Average monthly temperature varied from 0.4 °C in January to 26.5 °C in August, and monthly precipitation ranged between 10.8 and 274. 1 mm. Two typhoons (Manyi and Unagi) passed nearby Korea in July, 2007, but they did not affect the sites directly and no discernible impact on the biogeochemistry in sam- pling sites was observed. In situ soil temperature and water content were measured at the top soil (0–10 cm below the soil surface) during sampling. Sampled soils were stored at 4 °C until subsequent analysis. Subsamples (approximately 10 g) of soils from each core were taken for molecular analysis and stored at −20 °C. Soil pH was measured in slurries (soil-to-
distilled water ratio of 1:10) using a pH meter (Orion 3Star, ThermoScientific). Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) was extracted by filtering the soil slurries through a 0.2-μm filter, followed by quantification using a TOC analyzer (TOC-VCPH, Shimadzu). Phenolic content was determined using Folin– Ciocalteu phenol reagent (Box 1983). Extractable soil ammonia concentration was measured using the indo- phenol blue method (Anderson and Ingram 1989) and nitrate concentration was measured by ion chromatog- raphy. Our soil nutrient analysis in the present study focused on extractable nitrogen only because overall decomposition process in the study sites was known to be controlled by nitrogen availability (Min et al. 2011) and invasiveness is often induced by nitrogen enrich- ment. Phosphate concentration could be one of the key controlling variables for phosphatase activity particular- ly in aquatic ecosystems, but their relationship is highly complicated in soils (Jansson et al. 1988).
Microbial activity and community analysis
Extracellular enzyme activity was measured using methylumbelliferyl substrates (Kang and Freeman 1999). Fluorescence-labeled β-glucoside, β-N- acetylglucosaminide, phosphate, and arylsulfate were used to measure the activity of respective enzymes: β- glucosidase, N-acetylglucosaminidase, phosphatase, and arylsulfatase. Phenol oxidase activity was measured using L-dihydroxy phenylalanine (Freeman et al. 2004).
Bacterial communities were analyzed monthly from sampled soils; fungal communities were ana- lyzed in all months except for June and July, 2007. Total DNA was extracted from subsamples of soil using an UltraClean soil DNA isolation kit (MoBio Laboratories, USA). We used fluorescent- labeled primer pairs of 16S-27F-FAM (5′- AGAG TTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3′) and 927R (5′-CCGT CAATTCCTTTRAGTTT-3′) for bacteria, and ITSF-FAM (5′- CTTGGTCATTTAGAGGAAGT AA-3′) and ITS4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATAT GC-3′) for fungi (Mummey and Stahl 2003). PCR products were purified using the UltraClean PCR cleanup kit (MoBio) and digested using 5U HhaI (Promega, USA) restriction enzyme at 37 °C for 6 h. The peak length and area of terminal restriction fragments (TRFs) containing fluorescent label were de- termined using an ABI 3730 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, USA). Statistical analysis
Repeated measures ANOVA was conducted for soil chemical properties. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni post-hoc analysis was con- ducted separately for each month to compare physico- chemical variables and extracellular enzyme activity between locations. The Spearman correlation was used to assess the relationships between variables. The soil chemistry and extracellular enzyme activities except phenol oxidase activity—the least explanatory factor— were used for principal component analysis (PCA) to identify patterns and the differences of soil chemical and microbial properties between study locations. Microbial community structure and diversity were determined using TRF profiles. The fragment data were transformed into proportional abundance values (%) relative to the total fragment peak area in each sample. Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMS) ordination was per- formed using the TRF data set to compare differences in community structure between sites and seasons (Jan/Feb = winter; Apr/May = spring; Jun/Jul = summer; Aug, Oct = fall). A multi-response permutation procedure (MRPP) was applied to the ordinated data to test its significance using PC-ORD ver. 5.0 (MjM Software Design, USA). The MRPP determines the size of the effects using A-values (chance-corrected within- group agreement). The A statistic is used to describe within-group homogeneity compared to the value that would be expected by chance (McCune and Mefford 1999). 

xresults
We found that soil physicochemical properties changed due to Phragmites invasion (Table 1). Significantly higher organic matter and DOC were found in invaded
sites than in other locations. Relatively higher, but not statistically significant, water content with lower pH and phenolic contents were found in invaded sites than in other locations. When compared some aspects of soil chemistry monthly, the differences between sites be- came distinct, especially during the growing season (Fig. 1).
Phragmites-invaded soils exhibited higher extracel- lular enzyme activity (except for phenol oxidase), and differences in enzyme activity between invaded and native or mixed areas became apparent between May and July (Fig. 2). Despite the lack of statistical differ- ences in enzyme activity among locations in winter and early spring, we observed a consistent pattern of higher activity in the invaded site. Phosphatase activity was positively related to most of the measured soil chemical properties including water content, organic matter, DOC, NH4+ and phenolic contents; ß-D-glucosidase activity was negatively correlated with DOC. DOC content was positively correlated with phenol oxidase activity (Table 2). PCA based on soil chemical and microbial properties explained 71.6 % of variance by two components that separate the three study sites (Fig. 3). The first axis was highly correlated to phos- phatase, organic matter and DOC contents while the second axis reflected ß-D-glucosidase and N- acetylglucosaminidase activities.
We found significant differences in microbial diver- sity and community composition between sampling sites and seasons (Table 3). The effect of Phragmites invasion on the bacterial community was negligible, as 83–91 % of total bacterial TRFs were found in all three areas (Figs. 4 and 6a). Fungal community composition was significantly different between different areas (A- value=0.154, Table 3). However the main distinction was in the distance of fungi community in the mixed site from both invaded and native areas (Fig. 6b), and the difference in the fungal community between the invaded and native areas was minor. Up to 91 % of fungal and bacterial T-RFs observed in the native and invaded sites were shared between those sites or with the mixed site, while the majority of fungal T-RFs observed in the mixed site were unique (Fig. 4a, b). A larger number and higher diversity of T-RFs were found in the mixed site for both bacterial and fungal communities (Fig. 4a, b). The total number of T-RFs was highest in the mixed site, followed (in decreasing order) by the native and invaded areas. The same diversity trend calculated as Shannon’s index (i.e., higher diversity in the mixed areas) was found for fungal and bacterial communities (Fig. 5). Seasonal variation in microbial community composition was significant and larger than the effects of Phragmites, with A-values of 0.374 for bacteria and 0.492 for fungi (Fig. 6). 

xdiscussion
Despite numerous efforts to examine the responses of soil microorganisms to invasive plants, inconsistent re- sults are often obtained, especially under field condi- tions (Ehrenfeld 2003; Klironomos 2002; Angeloni et al. 2006; Broz et al. 2007). These inconsistencies possibly arise from complex factors such as large spatial and temporal variation in soil characteristics, and un- even plant diversity between undisturbed and invaded regions. In this study, we selected sites that were located within a short distance of one another, and that repre- sented undisturbed areas where plant diversity was sim- ilar to those in invaded areas. We anticipated that this approach would provide an improved understanding of the influence of invasive plants on the microbial com- munity by differentiating effects of modified soil char- acteristics and loss of plant diversity by plant invasion.
We found that expansion of Phragmites significantly influenced soil chemical characteristics. High soil or- ganic matter and DOC contents in invaded areas, par- ticularly during the growing season, can be explained by additional organic matter supply by P. australis through root exudation and litterfall associated with their high productivity. Live aboveground biomass of Phragmites in brackish marshes ranged from 727 to 3663 g dw m−2, which was much higher than that of other emergent vegetation (194–1340 g dw m−2) in the same areas (Meyerson et al. 2000). High belowground biomass of Phragmites compared to that of Scirpus lacustris (Van der Nat and Middelburg 1998) and of Spartina patens (Windham 2001) supports the idea that larger amount of nutrient pools would be available in invaded sites.
With changes in soil characteristics, Phragmites in- vasion affected belowground microbial communities. We originally predicted that slow decomposition rates of Phragmites associated with its recalcitrant litter con- strains extracellular enzyme activities in rhizosphere. Average K-values of 0.0039 d−1 for Phragmites and 0.0080 d−1 for Scirpus spp. indicating slower decompo- sition rate of Phragmites were found in various wetlands (Chimney and Pietro 2006). Lower nitrogen contents of Phragmites compared to those in Scirpus spp. slowed down both aboveground and belowground decomposi- tion rates (Wrubleski et al. 1997; Liao et al. 2008). Contrary to our expectation, we found that Phragmites invasion accelerated most extracellular enzyme activity. This result suggests that increased organic matter and DOC contents in the Phragmites rhizosphere stimulated extracellular enzyme activity. By adding substantial quantities of organic matter and increasing microhabitat area, invasive Phragmites may provide advantages for soil microorganisms (Colmer 2003; Kennedy 2005). Higher concentrations of labile nutrients (Thorpe et al. 2006; Herr et al. 2007), and soil oxidation in Phragmites-invaded areas by radial oxygen loss and convective gas flow (Armstrong et al. 1992, 2000) supported microbial activity and production (Caldwell 2005; Weidenhamer and Callaway 2010). High nitrification-denitrification and N mineralization rates 
 have been also reported from Phragmites-dominant areas (Windham and Ehrenfeld 2003). These results suggest that enhanced extracellular enzymes and the symbiotic relationship of Phragmites with soil microor- ganisms likely boost their expansion.
Increase of microbial activity corresponding to Phragmites expansion in brackish marshes was, how- ever, not connected to the shifts in microbial community composition in this study. Significant differences among the three study sites were mainly a result of large differ- ences in the community structure in the mixed area from those in the single species dominant native and invaded areas. Significant seasonal differences in the microbial communities also suggest that the microbial communi- ties were insensitive to plant invasion or to changes in dominant plant species. Interestingly, the mixed area, in which Scirpus and Phragmites were codominant, had higher microbial diversity than the single-species sites. This finding suggests that higher plant diversity likely supports microbial diversity. The complexity of physi- cochemical characteristics and resources provided by an evenly distributed or diverse plant community support niche complementarity, allowing a greater number of microbial species to coexist by reducing niche overlap and competition (Zak et al. 2003; Eisenhauer et al. 2013). Although diversity indices determined by T- RFLP or other fingerprinting techniques have been of- ten criticized due to their inaccuracy to identify species level communities and low resolution (Bent et al. 2007), they still provide reliable diversity comparison between three sites within this study.
Overall, our results demonstrate the Phragmites in- vasion impacts on soil biogeochemistry and below- ground microbial communities. These impacts involve two different processes, firstly by introducing a particu- lar species with different physiological characteristics in the Phragmites area of this study, and secondly by reducing the plant diversity. We conclude that introduc- tion of Phragmites has a major influence on wetland soil biogeochemistry. Phragmites invasion increased extra- cellular enzyme (especially hydrolase) activity by altering soil chemistry (e.g. increased organic matter, DOC contents). The replacement of native plant, Scirpus with Phragmites had a negligible effect on microbial community composition. Instead, plant diver- sity appeared to play a key role in determining microbial diversity. We found more diverse microbial communi- ties inhabited in mixed site, where invasive and native plants were coexisted, compared to those in single species-dominant sites. Our study thus highlights that replacement of native species and subsequent loss of plant diversity in wetlands leads to alteration of soil characteristics and loss of belowground microbial com- munities, all of which likely threaten the stability and functioning of wetland ecosystems. Further work is needed to understand how reduced microbial diversity and altered rates of extracellular enzyme activity by Phragmites invasion impact or has impacted the eco- system functions and services in brackish marshes.