xabstract


Biological plant invasions pose a serious

threat to native biodiversity and have received much

attention, especially in terrestrial habitats. In freshwater

ecosystems impacts of invasive plant species

are less studied. We hypothesized an impact on

organisms from the water column and from the

sediment. We then assessed the impact of three

aquatic invasive species on the plants and macroinvertebrates:

Hydrocotyle ranunculoides, Ludwigia

grandiflora and Myriophyllum aquaticum. Our

research on 32 ponds in Belgium indicated that the

reduction in the native plant species richness was a

common pattern to invasion. However, the magnitude

of impacts were species specific. A strong negative

relationship to invasive species cover was found, with

submerged vegetation the most vulnerable to the

invasion. Invertebrate richness, diversity and abundance

were measured in sediments of invaded and

uninvaded ponds along a gradient of H. ranunculoides,

L. grandiflora, and M. aquaticum species cover.

We found a strong negative relationship between

invasive species cover and invertebrate abundance,

probably due to unsuitable conditions of the detritus

for invertebrate colonization. Taxonomic compositions

of aquatic invertebrate assemblages in invaded

ponds differed from uninvaded ponds. Sensitive

benthos, such as mayflies were completely absent in

invaded ponds. The introduction of H. ranunculoides,

L. grandiflora, and M. aquaticum in Belgian ponds

has caused significant ecological alterations in the

aquatic vegetation and the detritus community of

ponds. xintroduction


Within the last 20 years, the study of biological

invasions has exploded and the introduction of exotic

species is now recognized as a serious threat to

biodiversity (Wilcove et al. 1998; Gurevitch and

Padilla 2004). Recently, much attention has been paid

to the impact of exotic species, direct or indirect, and

positive or negative, on different species groups in

terrestrial habitats. These include native plants (Hejda

and Pys?ek 2006; Gooden et al. 2009; Cushman and

Gaffney 2010), macroinvertebrates (Herrera and

Dudley 2003; Gerber et al. 2008) and pollinators

I. Stiers (&)  L. Triest

Plant Biology and Nature Management, Vrije Universiteit

Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium

e-mail: istiers@vub.ac.be

N. Crohain  G. Josens

Ecologie et Syste¥matique Animales,

Universite¥ Libre de Bruxelles, Avenue F.D. Roosevelt 50,

1050 Bruxelles, Belgium

123

Biol Invasions (2011) 13:2715ñ2726

DOI 10.1007/s10530-011-9942-9

(de Groot et al. 2007; Vanparys et al. 2008). The

impact of plant invasions in aquatic ecosystems has

received less attention. Freshwater systems, however,

are particularly vulnerable to the effects of exotic

species (Shea and Chesson 2002) and provide good

study systems because they usually have a more

limited number of species, compared to terrestrial

habitats such as grasslands. Native aquatic macrophytes

play a key role in the structure and function of

freshwater ecosystems by providing food, shelter and

oxygen for other aquatic life, including macroinvertebrates

(Van den Berg et al. 1997; Batzer 1998). A

shift, from a vegetated diverse habitat to a dense

exotic monospecific stand, can seriously alter native

plant and macroinvertebrate assemblages (Thorp

et al. 1997; Boylen et al. 1999).

Previous studies on the effects of aquatic weeds on

local biodiversity are few and contradictory in their

conclusions. The loss of native aquatic submerged

vegetation due to aquatic plant invasion has already

been reported (Boylen et al. 1999; Brendonck et al.

2003). In contrast, Langdon et al. (2004) found no

significant loss of plant species in UK ponds invaded

by the Australian weed Crassula helmsii. Several

studies focused on the impact of exotic macrophytes

on invertebrate communities and found (1) no clear

effect of the present invasive species on invertebrate

density and assemblage (Cattaneo et al. 1998), (2)

negative effects of the invasive species on density

and/or assemblage of invertebrates (Feldman 2001;

Toft et al. 2003) and (3) positive effects of the

invasive species on density of invertebrates (Strayer

et al. 2003; Pillips 2008). Few studies, however,

address multiple invasive aquatic plants and multiple

species groups.

We examined the effects of three invasive aquatic

plant species that were introduced in Belgium

through the aquarium trade. Hydrocotyle ranunculoides,

Ludwigia grandiflora and Myriophyllum aquaticum

have become well established and are

recognized as noxious weeds in several neighboring

countries (Pot 2002; Dandelot et al. 2005, 2008;

Gassmann et al. 2006; Sheppard et al. 2006; Thie¥baut

2007; Hussner 2009). These aquatic invasive plant

species appear in the floating/emergent growth form

and because of their high relative growth rates

(Hussner 2009) they can form dense floating mats.

This dense vegetation can block slow flowing waterways

and thereby disturb recreational activities, such

as boating and fishing (Pot 2002). They can also

affect drainage in lakes, ponds and ditches, as well as

reduce biodiversity and degrade water quality

(Sheppard et al. 2006).

Our main objective is to quantify the impact of

H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum

on two different functional groups, native plants and

macroinvertebrates. The aim is to assess to what

degree invasive species cover directly influences the

assemblage of native plants and indirectly modifies

macroinvertebrates in the detritus. Specifically, we

address the following questions: (1) is there an effect

on species richness, diversity, abundance and composition

of plants and invertebrates when invaded and

uninvaded sites are compared? (2) If so, is this effect

similar for each invasive species? (3) What is the

direction and magnitude of the impact? xmethods

In total 32 water bodies on 22 sites in Belgium

(Table 1) were sampled for the impact study made on

native vegetation and invertebrates by invasions of

either H. ranunculoides (7 sites), L. grandiflora (8

sites) or M. aquaticum (7 sites). The studied ponds

represent a gradient of percent cover of one of the

invasive species present (Table 1). A particular focus

was set on sites of high biological value (e.g. nature

reserves and Natura 2000 sites). All water bodies are

small and shallow ranging from 0.01 to 1.6 ha in

surface area with a depth ranging from 0.5 to 6 m,

thus there is no limit for macrophyte growth. Mixed

water samples were used to measure environmental

variables according to standard limnological procedures

(methods following De Backer et al. 2010).

Nutrient concentrations varied considerably between

ponds (Table 2). All three invasive species are

capable of invading this wide range of nutrient

levels. The uninvaded ponds range from oligotrophic

to hypereutrophic based on TP concentrations, while

invaded ponds range from mesotrophic to hypereutrophic

(UNEP 1999). Not all of the ponds could be

sampled for macroinvertebrates in 2008 because of

mechanical removal of the invasive species present in

2007. A few ponds were to deep to take representative

sediment samples with a hand-held coring tube. Macrophytes were monitored during August 2007

and 2008. To determine the impact of invasion of

H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum

on native plant species two approaches were used:

namely at a plot and pond level. For the purpose of

this study, native aquatic macrophytes included

vascular plants and algae in the family Characeae.

Filamentous algae (e.g. Spirogyra), which were often

associated with macrophyte beds were not included.

An ACFOR abundance scale (abundant: 75ñ100%,

common: 50ñ75%, frequent: 25ñ50%, occasional:

5ñ25%, rare: 1ñ5%) was used to estimate plant cover

(Kent and Coker 1992).

For the plot approach, when available, three

invasion categories (plots, 4 m2) were distinguished:

(A) plots in an uninvaded water body, (B) semiinvaded

plots in an invaded water body, and

(C) heavily invaded plots (cover[75%) in an

invaded water body. B and C plots were in the same

water body (invaded ponds) but we assured that the

semi-invaded plots were always at a maximum

distance of the infestation. A plots were in a separate

water body (uninvaded ponds) but in close vicinity.

The cover of native and invasive species was

estimated for each of the 114 plots. Species were

observed from the shore and by wading through the

water, deeper parts were sampled using a rake.

For the pond approach we recorded native plant

cover along a gradient of percent invasive species

cover. Cover estimates were made at the level of

three growth forms: submerged, free-floating/floating-

leaved and emergent. To determine the impact of decomposed alien litter

on macroinvertebrates, a pond level approach was

used. In April 2008, macroinvertebrates were sampled

in invaded ponds along a gradient of percent

invasive species cover and in adjacent uninvaded

ponds (Table 1) using a 1 m long, hand-held corer.

Six cores of 5 cm length (volume of 237.5 cm3

sediment per core) were taken at each sampling site

and pooled in the field. The corer was inserted into

random aquatic plant patches beneath young submerged

leaves or stolons as well as decomposed litter

at approximately 1 m pond depth. Both macrophytedwelling

invertebrates and invertebrates living in, or

on the sediment were sampled, but not considered

separately. Each subsample was placed into separate

containers and preserved in 10% formaldehyde. In

the laboratory each subsample was rinsed and passed

through different mesh sizes (2, 1 mm, 500, 350 lm). Using a binocular, macroinvertebrates were separated

from debris, enumerated, identified to family level and placed into a vial containing 70% ethanol. Species richness for plants was analysed at plot level

per invasive species to determine effect of invasion.

Differences in plant species richness in uninvaded

(A), semi-invaded (B) and heavily invaded (C) plots

for L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum were analyzed

using ANOVA, followed by a Tukey test (unequal N).

For H. ranunculoides a non-parametric alternative,

KruskalñWallis test, was used because of deviations

from the normal distribution (Sokal and Rohlf 2003).

Similarities in species composition amongst plots

with invasion categories (A, B and C) were compared

using one-way analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) per

invasive species (following Gooden et al. 2009). To

determine compositional similarities amongst invasion

categories, we used Bray-Curtis similarity indices

calculated on ACFOR abundances and on

presence/absence data. H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora

and M. aquaticum abundances were excluded

from all analyses as these defined the different

invasion categories.

The impact of H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora

and M. aquaticum cover on individual species was

assessed by analysing changes in native species cover

among the three invasion categories (A, B and C).

The KruskalñWallis ANOVA by ranks test was used

as the data did not satisfy assumptions of normality

and homogeneity of variance (Sokal and Rohlf 2003).

Analyses were undertaken using ACFOR abundances

for species which appeared in all three invasion

categories and were present in at least three ponds.

Taxa richness and Shannon index based on family

for invertebrates were analysed at pond level per

invasive species to determine impact of invasion.

Uninvaded ponds were grouped together. Differences

in invertebrate family richness and diversity between

uninvaded ponds and invaded ponds of H. ranunculoides,

L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum were

analysed using ANOVA, followed by a Tukey test

(unequal N). Standard Bray-Curtis similarity was

calculated between the four types of vegetation.

At pond level, a gamma correlation analysis was

performed between invasive species cover and the

different growth forms (submerged, floating (leaved),

emergent).APearson correlation analysis at pond level

was applied to invasive species cover and invertebrate

parameters (abundance and taxa richness).

ANOSIM analysis was performed with PRIMER

v6, all other analyses were performed using STATISTICA

v8.

xresults Uninvaded plots (A) harboured in total 28, 20 and 20

native species in close vicinity of infestation with H.

ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum,

respectively. These values compare to 17, 24 and 18

species, respectively, in semi-invaded plots (B) and to

9, 12 and 9 species in heavily invaded plots (C).

Recorded species included 12 submerged species, 7

floating-leaved and free floating species (e.g. Lemnids)

and 29 emergent species.

Uninvaded A plots of H. ranunculoides harboured

on average 5.20 ± 1.11 species compared to

1.60 ± 0.22 species in heavily invaded C plots. This

difference in number of species was of statistical

significance (Kruskall-Wallis: v2 2 = 8.80, P\0.01,

Fig. 1). For L. grandiflora the three invasion categories

differed significantly in species richness (ANOVA:

F2,38 = 23.30, P\0.001, Fig. 1). The M. aquaticum

uninvaded A plots had significantly higher plant species richness (4.00 ± 0.70) than heavily invaded C

plots (1.71 ± 0.45) (ANOVA: F2,35 = 4.21, P\0.05,

Fig. 1). On average, the impact of H. ranunuloides and

L. grandiflora was stronger (decrease of about 70%)

compared to a 57% decrease for M. aquaticum from

uninvaded A plots to heavily invaded C plots.

The species composition varied significantly

amongst invasion categories for H. ranunculoides

and L. grandiflora, but not for M. aquaticum (Table 3).

Native species composition was similar between

uninvaded and semi-invaded plots for H. ranunculoides

and between semi-invaded and heavily invaded

plots for L. grandiflora. For both invasive species,

native species composition differed significantly

among uninvaded plots and heavily invaded plots.

Presence/absence analysis gave similar patterns.

Kruskall-Wallis ANOVA by ranks was carried out

for 14 species in total. Of these, just four species

exhibited significant differences in abundance among

the different invasion categories, only for H. ranunculoides

and L. grandiflora invaded plots (Table 4).

Thus, for the majority of studied species, there was

no evidence of reduced abundance with increasing

invasive species cover. Importantly, no species were

more abundant in heavily invaded plots. Furthermore,

a few species including the submerged Utricularia

vulgaris and the free-floating Hydrocharis morsusranae

were completely absent from heavily invaded

plots, while they still occurred in adjacent semiinvaded

plots. Correlation analysis showed that total native species

cover declined significantly in response to percent

invasive species cover in all ponds (n = 32, C =

-0.66, P\0.001) as well as among invaded ponds

only (n = 22, C = -0.60, P\0.01).

A strong negative relationship was found between

invasive species cover and submerged species cover

and between invasive species cover and floating

(leaved) species cover in all ponds and among

invaded ponds only (Fig. 2; Table 5). The effect of

invasive species cover on emergent vegetation was

only marginally significant among all ponds. Native

submerged vegetation was present in 80% of the

uninvaded ponds, compared to 41% of the invaded

ponds. In almost every invaded and uninvaded pond,

native floating (leaved) and emergent vegetation was

present but the abundance declined when invasion

increased. In ponds with an invasive species cover of

[50% there was a decline of submerged species

cover, floating (leaved) species cover and emergent

species cover of 94, 68 and 44%, respectively, when

compared to uninvaded ponds. When the invasive

species cover reached 75% there was no submerged

vegetation left (Fig. 2). Uninvaded ponds harboured in total 17 different

families compared to 10, 9 and 14 families for

H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum

invaded ponds respectively. Mean invertebrate taxa

richness, mean invertebrate abundance and the

diversity index were slightly higher in the uninvaded

ponds and lowest in the L. grandiflora invaded ponds,

but no significant differences were found among the

four types of vegetation (P[0.05).

There was a considerable overlap in taxonomic

composition of invertebrates in invaded and uninvaded

ponds (range 52ñ80% similarity) with Diptera

and Oligochaeta as the largest groups. Naididae, 


Chironomidae and Asellidae were the common

families in the four vegetation types (Fig. 3). Invaded

ponds (either H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora or

M. aquaticum) were dominated by Naididae (56% or

more, Fig. 3b, c, d). In uninvaded ponds Naididae

(44%) and Planorbidae (29%) were the most abundant

groups (Fig. 3a). The Planorbidae family represented

one genus, the snail Gyraulus sp. which is an

epiphytic invertebrate. Importantly, no mayflies were

found in invaded ponds, while in uninvaded ponds

several individuals of Caenis sp. and Cloeon sp. were

observed. Correlation analysis showed that as percent invasive

species cover increased, invertebrate abundance significantly

decreased among all ponds (n = 22, r =

-0.46, P\0.05) as well as among invaded ponds

only (n = 15, r = -0.58, P\0.05, Fig. 4). In ponds

with an invasive species cover of[50% there was a

decline of invertebrate abundance of approximately

60% compared to uninvaded ponds. Invertebrate taxa

richness showed a significant linear decline in

response to invasive species cover among all ponds

(n = 22, r = -0.42, P\0.05), but not among

invaded ponds only (P[0.05). xdiscussion
Our study provides qualitative evidence that sites

invaded by H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and

M. aquaticum have a negative impact on both native

plants and macroinvertebrates. Each of the invasive

species significantly reduced native plant species

richness, with fewer species in heavily invaded

plots. In our heavily invaded plots, cover of the

invasive species was always between 90 and 100%

compared to a 25% invasive cover in semi-invaded

plots. These results confirm that the impact of an

invasive species is usually associated with the

degree of its dominance (Pys?ek and Pys?ek 1995).

Because of their rapid growth, they can form dense

canopies which occupy a large amount of space,

they block sunlight and oxygen exchange and as a

result outcompete native species. In full summer, the

oxygen content felled to\5 mg/l in the underlying

water layers of the dense canopies at some of our

heavily invaded sites (I. Stiers et al. unpublished

results). This is in agreement with the observations of Dandelot et al. (2005) and Hussner (2009).

Species compositions in heavily invaded plots by

H. ranunculoides and L. grandiflora were significantly

different from species compositions in uninvaded

plots. Impacts of H. ranunculoides,

L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum invasion amongst

individual species were difficult to obtain probably

because of a limited number of present native

species. This lack of evidence combined with the

results of the presence/absence results indicates that

the species composition differences found were

largely a consequence of changes in species presences

rather than abundances. In a study on impact

of Lantana camara on native vegetation, Gooden

et al. (2009) used similar methodology and also

found differences in species composition between

invaded and uninvaded sites. Nevertheless, our

results clearly demonstrate a strong negative association

between cover of the invasive species and

cover of the resident native vegetation because these

invaders usurp a large amount of space throughout

the water column. However, the response to the

invasion by the three different growth forms differed

considerably. These compositional changes were

exhibited mainly by the submerged growth forms

and the floating growth forms validating the results

of Hussner (2008) who described the displacement

of native submerged aquatic species due to the

expansion of dense floating mats of H. ranunculoides

and M. aquaticum. Native submerged and

floating species occupy the same position in the

water column as the invaders and therefore competition

is expected to be intense (Gopal and Goel.

1993). Their rapid growth rates will allow them to

capture the available resources more efficiently.

Similar cases of loss of native vegetation have been

reported for the invasive Eichhornia crassipes in

Lake Chivero, Zimbabwe (Brendonck et al. 2003).

Before the expansion of water hyacinth in the lake,

submerged and rooted floating-leaved macrophytes

were common in the shallow parts. Ali and Soltan

(2006) reported the replacement of the originally

dominant submerged macrophyte Najas marina

subsp. armata by the invasive Myriophyllum spicatum

in Lake Nasser, Egypt. Collectively, these

findings highlight the major impacts that aquatic

plant invaders have on submerged species.

The loss of biodiversity associated with the

invasion of alien species concerns mostly other

ruderal or alien species (Hulme and Bremner 2006).

In contrast, H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and

M. aquaticum also invade sites with a high conservation

interest. Rare (Utricularia vulgaris) and vulnerable

(Hydrocharis morsus-ranae) red list species

were absent in heavily invaded plots (Van Landuyt

et al. 2006).

Several researchers suggested that a combination

of biological traits can explain invasion success of

alien plants (Verlaque et al. 2002; Sutherland 2004;

Ku®ster et al. 2008; Milbau and Stout 2008; Pys?ek

et al. 2009). H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and

M. aquaticum possess some of these characters, such

as vegetative growth, rapid growth rate, a hydrophyte

life form, high plasticity in growth response and a

broad environmental tolerance which might explain

their success as invaders in Europe. Furthermore,

H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum

may also support the ëunlike invaderí hypothesis in

freshwater ecosystems (Alpert et al. 2000; Alpert

2006). Invasive species with life forms/strategies

different from or taxonomically unrelated with

species in the native community may be more

successful as invaders (Alpert et al. 2000; Mack

2003; Ricciardi and Atkinson 2004). The three

invasive species studied here, have very few native

congener species in Belgium and those that do exist

such as Ludwigia palustris, Hydrocotyle vulgaris and

Myriophyllum spicatum are rare or ecologically

different (Lambinon et al. 1998). Additionally, these

three species possess a trait that sets them apart from

previous invaders such as Elodea canadensis. All

three species exhibit a rapid stoloniferous perennial

growth, including production of floating and emergent

stems that allows them to develop space

monopolizing mats on both the open water and

exposed mud. M. aquaticum has even shown that it

has an enhanced root growth in drained soil, this will

allow it to successfully survive dry periods (Hussner

et al. 2009).

Our results on invertebrates showed that

H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum

cover negatively affected invertebrate taxa richness

and abundance in all ponds and the latter even in

invaded ponds only. Cover of a species is closely

related to biomass (Hejda et al. 2009). Floating weed

mats of these invasive species, were reported with

densities of up to 70 kg wet weight/m2 (H. ranunculoides;

Newman and Dawson 1999), 20ñ26 kg fresh weight (M. aquaticum; Hussner 2008) and 2 kg dry

weight (L. grandiflora; Dandelot et al. 2005). At the

time of our invertebrate sampling, the decomposed

litter of these plants and sediments formed a dense

dark mat on the bottom of the heavily invaded ponds

(I. Stiers, personal observation; Dandelot 2004). We

hypothesize that this is a condition unsuitable for

invertebrate colonization and will result in lower

abundance of invertebrates, when percent invasive

species cover increased. We found a high similarity

([75%) in taxonomic groups of ponds invaded by

H. ranunculoides, L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum.

Under the litter of the invasive species, dipterans of

the genus Chironomus and naidid oligochaetes were

common and they are known to be able to tolerate

oxygen stress (Mandaville 2002). Indeed, dissolved

oxygen in some of our invaded sites fell below 50%

saturation in spring 2008 (I. Stiers et al. unpublished

results). Uninvaded ponds supported a more distinct

invertebrate community, including species (e.g.

Ephemeroptera) that are rare or missing from invaded

ponds. The absence of a large number of individuals

of the genus Gyraulus sp. in invaded ponds can be

explained by their ecology, as they live in association

with submerged plants. Most of the invaded ponds

harboured less submerged vegetation. Several

researchers found compositional differences of both

epiphytic and benthic macroinvertebrates between

native and alien plants, however, these patterns were

not easily interpretable. They suggested that the

variations were due to biological (e.g. differences in

oxygen concentrations) and physical (e.g. differences

in aquatic root and canopy leaf structure) differences

between alien and native macrophytes (Feldman

2001; Strayer et al. 2003; Toft et al. 2003, Theel

et al. 2008).

It is clear that by their structuring effect, native

submerged macrophytes create a heterogeneous environment

that is very different from that of the open

water and that may have great impact on the

interactions between different trophic levels. Dense

submerged macrophyte beds show a positive correlation

with epiphytic and benthic invertebrate colonization

(Strayer and Malcom 2007; Shupryt and

Stelzer 2009). Furthermore, they compete with phytoplankton

and periphyton for light and nutrients and

provide a spatial refuge against predators for zooplankton

and small fish (van Donk and van de Bund

2002). The loss of submerged macrophytes due to

invasion is therefore drastic as they are an integral

part of the shallow aquatic ecosystems. This study provides evidence of the significant

negative impacts of three aquatic invaders in freshwater

ecosystems. Despite some limitations, it is

clear that the loss of native plant species richness was

a common pattern to invasion by H. ranunculoides,

L. grandiflora and M. aquaticum. Furthermore, the

introduction of these invasive species in Belgian

ponds has caused significant ecological alterations in

the detritus community of ponds. These invaders

represent a serious threat to the local biodiversity of

freshwater ecosystems in Belgium and other European

countries. Further spread must be prevented.