xabstract
1. We used a corer and a Downing box sampler to sample macroinvertebrates living on and beneath the introduced Trapa natans and the native Vallisneria americana in the freshwater tidal Hudson River, New York.
2. Densities of macroinvertebrates were higher in Trapa than in Vallisneria, and higher in the interior of plant beds than at their edges. These effects were largely a result of high plant biomass in Trapa beds and in bed interiors (the plants have similar surface area per unit mass).
3. The composition of both epiphytic and benthic macroinvertebrates differed distinctly between Trapa and Vallisneria, and also seasonally.
4. These compositional differences were not easily interpretable as rising from possible differences in oxygen concentrations, fish predation, or water circulation in the two macrophytes.
5. Sida crystallina (Cladocera) collected from Trapa contained more haemoglobin than those collected from Vallisneria.
6. The replacement of Vallisneria by Trapa in the Hudson probably increased system-wide biodiversity and food for fish, although macroinvertebrates in Trapa beds may not be readily available to fish because of low oxygen concentration there.

xintroduction
Species introductions are now recognised as one of the most important ways by which humans affect ecosystems. Introduced species often cause large changes in other parts of the biological community and in ecosystem processes (e.g. Vitousek et al., 1996; Cox, 1999). Aquatic plants have been widely intro- duced around the world through horticulture, inad- vertent contaminants of seed and ballast, and the aquarium trade (Mitchell & Ashton, 1989). Because different aquatic plants can have contrasting effects on
water chemistry, habitat structure and food resources, the replacement of one aquatic plant by another can have dramatic effects on many parts of aquatic ecosystems, including communities of macroinverte- brates (e.g. Keast, 1984; Thorp, Jones & Kelso, 1997).
In the Hudson River, and elsewhere in northeastern North America, the Eurasian water-chestnut (Trapa natans L.) has become abundant and widespread. Trapa has a rosette of floating leaves suspended on a long stalk and often occurs in very dense stands [100– 1000 g dry matter (DM) m)2). Trapa arrived in the Hudson in the mid-20th century, and is thought to have displaced submerged vegetation (chiefly Val- lisneria americana Michx.) from shallow water (Kiviat, 1993). It now occupies c. 4% of the surface area of the 150-km-long freshwater tidal Hudson (Findlay,
Wigand & Nieder, in press). Its leaves release oxygen directly into the atmosphere, while its stems and roots consume oxygen from the water, so the water beneath large and dense Trapa beds may become hypoxic or even completely anoxic (Caraco & Cole, 2002). Because Trapa has a different architecture than submerged plants, often occurs in much denser stands, and depletes rather than enhances dissolved oxygen, it has been thought to support distinctive communities of macroinvertebrates and fish (Cattaneo et al., 1998; Feldman, 2001; Strayer, 2003).
Previous studies comparing the invertebrate faunas of Trapa and nearby submerged vegetation have been few and contradictory. Cattaneo et al. (1998) found that Trapa and nearby mixed submerged plants supported about the same density (per area of lake bottom) and kind of macroinvertebrates in an Italian lake. In contrast, Feldman (2001) found that the submerged plant V. americana supported many more (per area of river bottom) and different kinds of invertebrates than nearby Trapa in the upper, non- tidal Hudson River. Neither Cattaneo et al. (1998) nor Feldman (2001) sampled the macroinvertebrates liv- ing in the sediments beneath the plants, concentrating instead on the epiphytic forms.
The goals of our study were to compare the macroinvertebrate faunas (including both epiphytic and benthic animals) of Trapa with those of nearby beds of Vallisneria, the species it is thought to have displaced, in the freshwater tidal Hudson River. We also interpreted differences in faunas in the light of possible environmental differences between the two kinds of plant beds and assess possible impacts of the Trapa invasion on the fauna of the whole freshwater tidal Hudson.

xmethods
The study area
We studied four plant beds: two pairs of adjoining beds of Trapa and Vallisneria in the freshwater tidal section of the Hudson River in eastern New York (Fig. 1). There is no trace of sea salt in this part of the river, but the tidal cycle affects water depth (tidal range c. 1 m) and current speed and direction. Cruger Island is a peninsula along the east bank of the Hudson at river kilometre (RKM) 158. Just south of the peninsula is a large area of shallow water, which
supports a large bed (19 ha, areas of beds from Findlay et al., 1997) of submersed vegetation. A small bed of Trapa (1.7 ha) abuts the northern end of this bed. Esopus Meadows is a large shallow-water area along the west bank of the river at RKM 138. A large bed (19 ha) of Vallisneria occurs outside of a large bed (93 ha) of Trapa at this site. As is typical in the tidal Hudson, all four study beds are nearly monospecific stands of either Trapa or Vallisneria. Plant biomass varied with both species and season (Table 1). The water at both study sites is fully fresh (<1 psu), and is <1 m deep at low tide. Sediments at the study sites are soft sands and muds, averaging 44% sand, 43% silt and 14% clay (n 1⁄4 85). Loss on ignition averaged 4.3% (n 1⁄4 71).
Sample collection and processing
We took macroinvertebrate samples at 12 sites within each pair of plant beds (six in each species of plant, three along its outer edge and three in its interior) and at three sites just outside the plant beds (Fig. 1). Samples from the interior of Trapa beds were taken only c. 50 m from the bed’s edge because of the difficulty of moving through these very dense beds.
Within the plant beds, we collected animals from the plants and the sediments at each sampling site. All sites were sampled in July (before the vegetation was fully developed) and again in August 2000 (near peak biomass).
We sampled macroinvertebrates in the different habitats using three different methods. Animals living in shallow-water sediments were collected using a hand-held coring tube of 20 cm2. Three cores c. 5 cm long were taken from each sampling site and pooled in the field. Invertebrates living on macrophytes were collected with a Downing box sampler (Downing, 1986). We collected two (Trapa) or three (Vallisneria) samples per site, which were pooled in the field. Sediment-dwelling animals living just outside the plant beds in water too deep to sample with our corer were collected with a petite Ponar grab (232 cm2); again, three samples per site were taken and pooled in the field. All samples were sieved through a 0.5-mm mesh sieve and preserved in buffered 10% formalin in the field. We sorted samples under 6–12· magnifica- tion, and placed animals into 70% ethanol or 10% buffered formalin for long-term storage. Sixteen per cent of the samples were double-sorted; we estimated recovery efficiency from these samples using the removal method of Zippen (1958) and corrected all samples for these efficiencies. Random subsamples (up to 10 individuals per sample) of oligochaetes, chironomids and nematodes were slide-mounted in CMC-10 on microscope slides prior to identification. Most animals were identified to genus or species level (Gosner, 1971; Holsinger, 1972; Bousfield, 1973; Wiederholm, 1983; Andrassy, 1988; Peckarsky et al., 1990; Smith, 1995 and Kathman & Brinkhurst, 1998). Voucher specimens have been deposited in the American Museum of Natural History, New York City.
To describe the body-size structure of invertebrate communities, we randomly selected c. 50 animals from each of nine habitats sampled at each site in August and dried them overnight at 60 °C. We weighed individual animals using a Cahn Model 29 electrobalance (Cahn Instruments, Cerritos, CA, U.S.A.). We measured ash-free DM (12 h at 500 °C) of the few molluscs in the samples; masses of other animals are DM following fluid preservation.
We used a visual index to estimate the haemoglobin content of the cladoceran Sida crystallina, following the approach of Carvalho (1984) and LaBerge & Hann (1990). We scored the animals in each sample as being colourless (0), light yellow (1), yellow-brown (2), light brown (3), brown (4), or reddish brown (5).
To estimate the areal density of plant biomass (necessary to convert counts of invertebrates from the Downing sampler into areal densities), we took 16 samples from each Vallisneria bed with a standard Ponar grab (523 cm2), and hand-clipped six plots of known dimension within the Trapa beds. Only above- ground plant parts were retained in the samples. Plants were dried overnight at 60 °C before being weighed.
We calculated invertebrate density per g DM of plant. Density of plant-dwelling invertebrates is often expressed per m2 of plant surface area. Because Trapa and Vallisneria have nearly identical surface area per g DM (0.021 and 0.025 m2 g)1, respectively; Feldman, 2001), our conclu- sions would change little if our data were expressed per m2 of plant surface area instead per g of plant.
We used detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) to describe macroinvertebrate community structure (PC-ORD 4.14, MjM Software, Gleneden Beach, OR, U.S.A. 1999). We omitted rare species (those with less than five occurrences in the full data set and less than three occurrences in the epiphytic or benthic data sets) from the analysis.

xresults
Invertebrate density
Density of macroinvertebrates ranged from 230 to 85 000 m)2, and was much higher in vegetated hab- itats than in nearby unvegetated sediments (Fig. 2). Within vegetated habitats, macroinvertebrate density was higher in Trapa than in Vallisneria, and higher in the interior of the beds than near their edges. Much of this variation was associated with differences in plant biomass across habitats (Fig. 3; Table 2). Not surpris- ingly, the density of epiphytic macroinvertebrates was
positively correlated with plant biomass. In contrast, the density of benthic macroinvertebrates was nearly unrelated to plant biomass, except for being low in entirely unvegetated sediments (Fig. 3; Table 2). Epiphytic macroinvertebrate density (per unit bio- mass of plants) was higher in July than in August, and was higher in the interior of plant beds than at their edges. Effects of site and plant species on density (per unit biomass of plants) of both epiphytic and benthic macroinvertebrates were weak and inconsistent.
Community structure
We identified a total of 91 species of macroinverte- brates, 41, 58 and 52 of which were found in unvegetated habitats, Trapa beds and Vallisneria beds, respectively. The composition of the inverteb- rate community varied with habitat (plant versus sediment), plant species and season (Fig. 4; Tables 3 and 4).
When all samples were considered, benthic animal communities were clearly separated from epiphytic communities, and samples taken early in the growing season separated out from those taken at full veget- ative growth (Fig. 4a; Table 4). Characteristically epiphytic species (those on the left side of Fig. 5a) include Cricotopus bicinctus (Chironomidae), water mites (Hygrobates sp. and Lebertia sp.), Rheotanytarsus sp. (Chironomidae), Hydra sp., naidid oligochaetes (Pristina leidyi, Nais variabilis, and Stylaria lacustris), Actinolaimus sp. (Nematoda), Enallagma sp. (Odonata) and S. crystallina (Cladocera). Species usually found in sediments (on the right side of Fig. 5a) included tubificid oligochaetes (Limnodrilus udekemianus, Aulo- drilus americanus, Aulodrilus limnobius Bretscher, Aulo- drilus pigueti Kowaleski, Limnodrilus hoffmeisteri), two nematodes (Idiodorylaimus sp., Dorylaimus cf. stagnalis), Cryptochironomus sp. (Chironomidae), Pisidium sp. (Bivalvia) and Cyathura polita (Stimpson) (Isopoda).
When epiphytic and benthic samples were consid- ered separately, the influence of plant species became clear. Epiphytic invertebrate communities on Trapa were distinct from those of Vallisneria; in addition, community structure differed between the two
sampling times (Fig. 4b; Table 4). Epiphytic commu- nities on Trapa (those on the left side of Fig. 5b) were characterised by Cricotopus sp. A (Chironomidae), Ceratopogonidae, Actinolaimus sp. (Nematoda), P. leidyi and N. variabilis (Oligochaeta), S. crystallina (Cladocera) and Ablabesmyia sp. (Chironomidae). In contrast, species like the chironomids C. bicinctus, Rheotanytarsus sp., Dicrotendipes sp., the water mites Hygrobates sp. and Lebertia sp., Hydra sp., Mermithidae (Nematoda) and Ferrissia fragilis (Tryon) (Gastropoda) were more typically found on Vallisneria.
Similarly, benthic invertebrate communities dif- fered sharply between the two macrophyte species, although the distinction was perhaps less clear than that for epiphytic invertebrates (Fig. 4c; Table 4). Benthic invertebrate communities from the unvege- tated margins of the macrophyte beds resembled those of Vallisneria. Species characteristic of the different benthic habitats include Pyrrhalta nymphaeae (Coleoptera), Dreissena polymorpha (Bivalvia), S. crys- tallina (Cladocera), S. lacustris (Oligochaeta) and Gammarus tigrinus (Amphipoda) under Trapa, and Potamothrix moldaviensis (Oligochaeta), Idiodorylaimus sp. (Nematoda) and Cryptochironomus sp. (Oligocha- eta) under Vallisneria (Fig.5c). There were also seasonal differences in the composition of the benthic invertebrate communities (Fig. 4c; Table 4).
Although we did not measure dissolved oxygen in our study sites, beds of Trapa often are hypoxic or anoxic (Caraco & Cole, 2002). Measurements made from 24 to 31 July 2001 at the edge of the small bed of Trapa at Cruger Island showed that dissolved oxygen fell to c. 50% saturation (c. 4.2 mg L)1) every
low tide (E. Bedan, personal communication), and we suspect that oxygen concentration was lower later in the season, at the larger bed at Esopus Meadows, and in the interior of both Trapa beds. Thus, we were especially interested in the abundance of animals that contain haemoglobin. Two such taxa were common in our samples. Many cladocerans can induce haemoglobin production if oxygen concentra- tion is low (Dodson & Frey, 2001). The colour of S. crystallina (an index of its haemoglobin content) was significantly darker in Trapa than in Vallisneria (Fig. 6; A N O V A , F 1⁄4 59.4, P < 0.000001), and margin- ally darker at Esopus Meadows than at Cruger Island (A N O V A , F 1⁄4 3.4, P 1⁄4 0.07). Many chirono- mids (chironomines and tanypodines other than pentaneurines) contain haemoglobin (Cranston, 1995), but the proportion of chironomines and tanypodines in the chironomid community was actually significantly lower in Trapa than in Vallisne- ria (A N O V A , F 1⁄4 11.7, P 1⁄4 0.001), which is contrary to the expected pattern. This pattern arose because of
the dominance of Cricotopus sp. A, an orthoclad that does not contain haemoglobin, in Trapa.
Size structure
Invertebrates living in unvegetated channel sediments tended to be larger than those of plant beds because of the predominance of large-bodied tubificid oligocha- etes in channel sediments (Fig. 7). There were no consistent differences in the size structure of commu- nities taken from plant beds. Invertebrates were larger from Trapa than from Vallisneria at Cruger Island, but no such difference was found at Esopus Meadows (Fig. 7; Table 5). Size structure did not differ between epiphytic and benthic communities, or between edge and interior habitats (Table 5).

xdiscussion
Trapa and Vallisneria supported very different macro- invertebrate communities. Overall, densities were
higher in Trapa than in Vallisneria, apparently as a result of the higher biomass in Trapa beds. It is well established that invertebrate numbers or biomass are positively correlated with plant biomass (e.g. Cyr & Downing, 1988a; Lalonde & Downing, 1992; Humphries, 1996). Many authors have reported that different plant species support different numbers of invertebrates per gram of plant tissue, and a large literature is devoted to documenting and explaining such differences (e.g. Schramm, Jirka & Hoyer, 1987; Cyr & Downing, 1988b; Humphries, 1996; Wollheim & Lovvorn, 1996). There was no indication that a unit biomass of the two plant species supported different numbers of invertebrates (note the non-significance of the plant species effect in Table 2) – a gram of Trapa supported about the same number of invertebrates as a gram of Vallisneria. The two macrophytes also supported different kinds of invertebrates, supporting many previous studies that studied the effects of plant species on invertebrate community composition (e.g. Humphries, 1996; Wollheim & Lovvorn, 1996; Thorp et al., 1997). Both epiphytic and benthic invertebrates differed strongly between the two macrophytes. Despite these large differences in community compo- sition, we did not detect consistent differences in the size structure of the invertebrate community between the two macrophytes, in contrast to Hanson’s (1990) findings.
Trapa appears to support more epiphytic inverte- brates than Vallisneria simply because it reaches higher standing biomasses. Other causes for the striking differences between the macroinvertebrate communities of Trapa and Vallisneria are less clear. None of the most obvious environmental differences between Trapa and Vallisneria seems to be a promising explanation for the observed differences in macro- invertebrate communities. Large Trapa beds are sub- ject to severe hypoxia or even anoxia (Caraco & Cole, 2002), but the invertebrate communities of our Trapa beds showed few obvious symptoms of oxygen stress. It is true that the cladoceran S. crystallina contained more haemoglobin in Trapa than in Vallisneria, but the chironomid community of Trapa contained a smaller proportion of haemoglobin-bearing animals than that of the oxygen-rich Vallisneria beds. Hypoxic and anoxic habitats in lakes usually have very low species richness, and are inhabited by a very few species (some of the tubificid oligochaetes and dipterans of the genera Chironomus and Chaoborus)
that are well known to be able to tolerate oxygen stress (e.g. Brinkhurst, 1974; Jonasson, 1978; Strayer, 1985). Further, if oxygen stress was important to
macroinvertebrates in the Trapa beds, we might expect that benthic animals would be sparse compared with epiphytic animals. Neither overall species richness nor benthic densities were lower in Trapa beds than in nearby Vallisneria.
We thought that fish predation might be lower in Trapa beds than in Vallisneria, as a result of heavy cover and possibly low oxygen in Trapa beds. Less fish predation might be expected to result in more and larger macroinvertebrates in Trapa than in Vallisneria. Further, we might expect to find the largest macroin- vertebrates in the interior of Trapa beds, as fish might have access to the macroinvertebrates living along the edges. We did find a higher density of macroinver- tebrates in Trapa than in Vallisneria, but this difference disappeared when we normalised for the effect of plant biomass. We found more large invertebrates in one of the Trapa beds than in the nearby Vallisneria bed, but this was not true in the other Trapa– Vallisneria pair. Thus, the differences we observed across habitats in macroinvertebrate communities are not readily interpretable as evidence of fish predation.
Finally, we thought that reduced water movement as a result of the heavy cover in Trapa beds might cause a reduction of suspension feeders in this habitat, particularly in bed interiors. Again, we found no clear support for this idea. Only a few species of suspension feeders were present in our study sites; some were more abundant in Trapa (D. polymorpha, S. crystallina), whereas others were more abundant in Vallisneria (Pisidium sp., Rheotanytarsus sp.).
Regardless of its causes, the change in invertebrate communities associated with the replacement of large areas of Vallisneria by Trapa in the Hudson may have had at least two important consequences for the riverine ecosystem. First, because Trapa supports a distinctive invertebrate community including species that are rare or missing from Vallisneria, the invasion of Trapa may have substantially increased system-wide biodiversity. Secondly, it appears that invertebrate densities are increased in Trapa as a result of higher plant biomass than in Vallisneria, perhaps resulting in a greater biomass of food available to fish and other predators. Because of heavy cover and low oxygen concentrations in large Trapa beds, it is not clear that this food is fully available to predators, however.
There appears to be surprisingly little generality to the results we found in the Hudson, as other studies comparing Trapa and submerged macrophytes found very different results. Working in an Italian lake, Cattaneo et al. (1998) found that epiphytic invertebrate communities were about equally dense (per m2 of lake bottom) on Trapa and various submerged plants, and were dominated by gastropods and chironomids on
both plants. Feldman (2001) studied the epiphytic invertebrate fauna of Trapa and Vallisneria in the upper, non-tidal Hudson River, and found that Val- lisneria supported two- to sixfold more invertebrates (per m2 of river bottom) than Trapa. The invertebrate community of Trapa was dominated (in order) by the amphipod Hyallela azteca (Saussure) (28%), chirono- mids (13%), the mayfly Caenis (10%) and the beetle P. nymphaeae (7%), whereas that of Vallisneria was dominated by chironomids (50%), H. azteca (10%) and the gastropod Ferrissia (8%). In the tidal Hudson, we found that Trapa supported about twice as many invertebrates as Vallisneria, and that both epiphytic and benthic macroinvertebrate communities differed strongly between the two species, but not in a way that at all resembled Feldman’s (2001) findings. Thus, there is neither agreement about what kinds of macroinver- tebrate communities that Trapa versus submerged plants support, or whether these two communities differ in species composition or abundance. The only common element among the three studies is that all found that Trapa supported as many or more kinds of invertebrates as submerged plants, which is itself surprising in the light of the low dissolved oxygen found in large Trapa beds (Caraco & Cole, 2002).
This remarkable lack of congruence among studies suggests either that macroinvertebrate communities are so variable across beds or years that all underlying pattern is obscured or that the ecological role of an aquatic plant depends on the environmental context into which it is placed. We do not believe that intersite or interannual variability is so large that it obscures underlying patterns. We found a general agreement in density and community structure between our two study sites (note the generally low importance of ‘site’ compared with plant species and biomass in Tables 2, 4 and 5), as did Cattaneo et al. (1998), who studied multiple plant beds. Further, Findlay, Schoeberl & Wagner (1989), who worked on the fauna of Trapa in the freshwater tidal Hudson, found the same domi- nant species of macroinvertebrates (S. crystallina, Cricotopus sp.) as we did.
Rather, it appears that the environmental setting may influence the roles that aquatic plants play. This influence may have both systematic and idiosyncratic elements. For example, a nutrient-rich water column or active water exchange may encourage high densities of epiphytic algae, bacteria and macroinver- tebrates, especially suspension feeders (cf. Cyr &
Downing, 1988a; Pieczynska, Kolodziejczyk & Rybak, 1998). Characteristics of the aquatic plant may cause deviations from the hypothesised relationships, i.e. plants that are particularly edible or have highly dissected foliage may support unusually dense populations of invertebrates (Cheruvelil et al., 2002). Idiosyncratic environmental elements include the composition of the regional macroinvertebrate species pool (e.g. the beetle P. nymphaeae, such a characteristic part of the Trapa fauna in the North American studies, does not occur in Europe; Nokkala, Nokkala & Nordell-Paavola, 1998), and locally important controls on macroinvertebrate community structure such as disturbance regime, predation intensity, etc. As a result, any assessment of the consequences of an aquatic plant replacement must consider not only the characteristics of the aquatic plants, but also those of the environment in which the replacement occurs.
