xabstract


Bythotrephes longimanus is an invertebrate predator

that has invaded the North American Great Lakes

and a number of inland lakes, where it preys on

crustacean zooplankton. We examined the effect of

Bythotrephes on two measures of ecosystem function

during a four-month observational study of freshwater

lakes on the boreal shield. Bythotrephes-invaded

lakes had significantly lower epilimnetic

zooplankton abundance and production compared

to reference lakes. On average, Bythotrephes consumed

34% of zooplankton production when it

was present in lakes. There was some evidence of

changes in the timing of zooplankton production,

as well as shifts to cooler, less productive habitats,

which may lessen the overall effect of the invader

on the transfer of energy to higher trophic levels.

We experimentally demonstrated a weak trophic

cascade where invader predation reduced zooplankton

biomass, and subsequently increased

phytoplankton growth. However, the response was

small in magnitude and not biologically relevant at

the whole lake-scale. The most conspicuous effect

of Bythotrephes that we measured was a diversion of

energy away from native predators at higher trophic

levels. xintroduction


The introduction of non-indigenous species is

expected to be one of the greatest threats to species

across all ecosystems (Wilcove and others 1998;

Sala and others 2000) and the single most important

driver of biodiversity loss in freshwater lakes

(Sala and others 2000). Although there is evidence

that invasive species can alter ecosystem function

(Brooks and others 2004; Zhu and others 2006), we

currently lack understanding of how newly introduced

species may affect ecosystem processes

(Millenium Ecosystem Assessment 2005). Thus, the

invasion of a non-native species presents a unique

opportunity to understand how complex ecosystems

operate.

Bythotrephes longimanus (Crustacea, Branchiopoda,

Onychopoda) is a parthenogenetic invertebrate

predator that has invaded all of the North

American Great Lakes (Jin and Sprules 1990), and

more than 100 inland lakes in North America,

including waterbodies in Ontario (N. Yan, unpublished

data), Minnesota (Branstrator and others

2006), and Michigan (Jarnagin and others 2000).

Although studies have indicated that Bythotrephes

prefers large, deep, low productivity lakes in both

its native Eurasia and in invaded regions (MacIsaac and others 2000), it has been found in smaller

shallow waterbodies and higher productivity lakes

as well (Jarnagin and others 2000). Bythotrephes has

the potential to invade many boreal shield and

northern temperate lakes, especially those visited

by human vectors.

Bythotrephes can have substantial effects on the

community structure of its primary prey, crustacean

zooplankton, and although there is some

degree of among-lake variability in the response to

invasion, the general trend has been reductions in

species richness (Yan and others 2002; Strecker and

others 2006), total community biomass (Boudreau

and Yan 2003; Strecker and Arnott 2005), and total

community abundance of zooplankton (Yan and

others 2001; Strecker and Arnott 2005; Strecker

and others 2006). These trends follow from dramatic

declines in cladoceran zooplankton richness

and abundance (Yan and others 2001; Boudreau

and Yan 2003; Strecker and others 2006).

Zooplankton are a central component in freshwater

food webs, transferring energy to young-ofyear

(YOY) and planktivorous fish via production

of biomass, grazing on phytoplankton biomass, and

recycling dissolved nutrients to phytoplankton.

Foraging success of juvenile fish can be greatly

influenced by variability in zooplankton populations

in freshwater ecosystems (Chick and van den

Avyle 1999; Beauchamp and others 2004). In one

study, it was observed that Bythotrephes consumed

large portions of zooplankton production in Harp

Lake, Ontario during summer (Dumitru and others

2001), potentially decreasing the amount of production

available to other components of the

aquatic food web. Additionally, when Bythotrephes

was present, total consumption of the invertebrate

predator guild increased by greater than 300% (S.

Foster, personal communication), potentially

reducing the efficiency of energy transfer to higher

trophic levels (Sprules 1980).

The impact of zooplankton on phytoplankton is

influenced by zooplankton biomass and community

compositionóand is therefore potentially affected

by Bythotrephes predation. Zooplankton

grazing and nutrient recycling can have a greater

effect on phytoplankton biomass in lakes than

nutrient recycling of fish (Sarnelle and Knapp

2005), and grazing by large cladoceran zooplankton

can exert strong top-down control on phytoplankton

(Elser and Goldman 1991). Thus, zooplankton

community structure in lakes can be a

primary determinant of the flow of energy and

nutrients to all trophic levels; however, few studies

have examined the effects of invaders on nutrient

and energy flow at multiple levels of organization

in freshwater systems (Simon and Townsend

2003).

The overall purpose of this study was to determine

the effects of the invasive predator, Bythotrephes,

on ecosystem function in boreal lakes.

Ecosystem function is commonly measured as

changes in rates of productivity, decomposition,

nutrient cycling, and resistance and resilience to

perturbations (Loreau and others 2001). In our

study, we measured ecosystem function as changes

in rates of secondary productivity and the combined

effects of zooplankton grazing and nutrient

cycling on phytoplankton. The two main objectives

of our study were to examine: (1) the effect of

Bythotrephes on crustacean zooplankton production

within each lake stratum and throughout the icefree

season; and (2) if zooplankton impact on

phytoplankton is influenced by Bythotrephes-induced

changes in community composition and

biomass.

Based on reductions in zooplankton abundance

observed in previous studies (Yan and others 2001;

Strecker and others 2006), we hypothesized that

Bythotrephes would negatively affect zooplankton

production. Bythotrephes tends to be absent in lakes

until middle-to-late June (Yan and others 2001),

creating a window of opportunity before this time

period for zooplankton to increase their reproduction.

Therefore, we expect to see a less pronounced

effect of Bythotrephes on coarse measures of overall

seasonal and whole-water column production, but

differences in fine-scale temporal (biweekly) and

spatial (variation between strata) patterns of zooplankton

production. Secondly, the effects of zooplankton

grazing and nutrient recycling on

phytoplankton are significantly influenced by both

community biomass and composition (Elser and

Goldman 1991; Cyr 1998; Elser and others 2000),

thus, we would expect zooplankton communities

in invaded lakes to have a lessened impact on

phytoplankton as a result of Bythotrephes-induced

reductions in total zooplankton biomass and

selective predation on cladocerans. xmethods

Eight lakes in the Parry Sound and Muskoka districts

of south-central Ontario were chosen for our

study (Table 1). The study lakes are located in

mixed-forest catchments, have low productivity

(oligo-mesotrophic), and are circumneutral. Lakes

are relatively deep, ranging from 23 to 59 m, and

have surface areas ranging from 72 to 2058 ha (Table 1). Lakes were chosen based on prior

knowledge of the invasion of Bythotrephes (invaded

lakes had Bythotrephes for at least 5 years), proximity,

and similarity of chemical, physical, and

morphometric characteristics. As well, all of the

lakes contained the glacial relict Mysis relicta, which

is indicative of a similar post-glacial history, and

planktivorous fish communities, including yellow

perch (Perca flavescens) and a combination of cisco

(Coregonus artedi), rainbow smelt (Osmerus mordax),

and lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis)

(Appendix 1).

Lakes were visited every two weeks from May to

September 2003 (n = 9), and samples were generally

taken within a five-day time period. At a deep

station in the lake, temperature, dissolved oxygen,

and Secchi depth were measured, and samples

were taken for zooplankton, Bythotrephes, and

chlorophyll a (chl a). Four additional sample stations

for Bythotrephes collection were chosen along

a transect, starting at the deep station and moving

toward shore, marking each station with a GPS to

locate it on the next sampling date (see Strecker

and others 2006 for sampling details). Logistical

constraints prevented sampling at night so all

samples were taken during the day. Chl a samples

were taken from the epilimnion using a 2.5-cm

diameter integrated tube sampler. The integrated

tube sampler was also used to collect water from

the epilimnion on the week of 14 July 2003 for

analysis of water chemistry variables.

Zooplankton were sampled with a 110-lm mesh

conical closing net that was 0.5 m in diameter.

Samples were taken in the epilimnion, metalimnion,

and hypolimnion (from 5 m off the lake

bottom to the top of the hypolimnion) after thermal

strata were determined from a temperature

profile taken at 1-m intervals. The top of the

metalimnion was defined as a change of more than

1C per meter, and the top of the hypolimnion by a

change of less than 0.2C per meter. On the first

sampling date, stratification had not yet been

achieved in Bernard Lake, so the depth of the entire

water column was roughly divided in to 3 and

samples were taken from those depths. Average

temperatures from each strata in Bernard Lake on

the first date were consistent with other lakes, thus,

we do not believe that this method affected our

results. The hypolimnion of Doe Lake could not be

sampled on seven dates because it was too shallow; therefore, this lake was excluded from hypolimnetic

abundance and production estimations.

Samples for Bythotrephes were taken over the entire

water column, starting from 5 m off the lake bottom,

using a 400-lm mesh conical net that was

0.5 m in diameter. Bythotrephes and zooplankton

samples were anesthetized and preserved in 5.5%

sugared and buffered formalin.

Zooplankton samples were enumerated and

measured on a Leica MZ12.5 dissecting microscope

using the semi-automated counting system ZEBRA2

(Allen and others 1994). Subsamples of a

known volume were taken and a minimum of 350

individuals were identified to genus, with the

exception of Daphnia mendotae, Eubosmina (Neobosmina)

tubicen, Eubosmina (Eubosmina) coregoni, Eubosmina

(Eubosmina) longispina, and other species

which are the only representative of their genus in

the area. Diaptomid calanoid copepods belonging

to the genera Leptodiaptomus and Skistodiaptomus

were grouped simply as Diaptomus spp. To obtain a

representative enumeration of all zooplankton

genera present, only 40ñ50 individuals of the

dominant taxa, 40ñ50 copepodids per order, and

20ñ30 nauplii per order were counted. Both loose

and attached eggs were counted in the subsamples,

stopping either when the minimum number of

individuals was reached or more than 700 loose

eggs were counted. Loose eggs were designated as

cladoceran or copepod and apportioned to the

number of adults present. Bythotrephes samples

containing less than 32 individuals were counted in

their entirety, whereas samples with greater numbers

were split with a Folsom plankton splitter and

mixed to ensure that clumping did not occur. All

instars were enumerated and abundances were

averaged across the five sampling stations. Although Bythotrephes (Pangle and Peacor 2006)

and other visual predators (Lampert 1989) can induce

diel vertical migration of zooplankton, we

chose to sample during the day to specifically

examine the vertical distribution of productivity

available to visually foraging predators, such as

cisco, which are daytime feeders (Milne and others

2005). Comparisons of day and night vertically

stratified samples of zooplankton taken in 2007 in

most of our study lakes suggest that some zooplankton

migrated downwards in invaded lakes

during the day, whereas diel migrations in noninvaded

lakes tended to be small in magnitude

(S. Arnott, unpublished data). There was variability

in the extent of migration in invaded lakes: on

average 15% of total zooplankton (range: )13 to

31%; negative value represents migration in the

opposite direction) moved from the metalimnion to

the epilimnion at night, but migration of zooplankton

away from the hypolimnion to warmer

temperatures at night was small (mean: 9%, range:

)9 to 28%). We acknowledge that as a result of

these migrations, our calculations may underestimate

metalimnetic production in invaded lakes by

including organisms that have spent nights at warmer

temperatures.

Biweekly zooplankton production was calculated

using two methods. For the calanoid copepod species

that do not carry their eggs in an egg sac (for

example, Senecella calanoides), the cohort method

was used (Downing 1984). For all other zooplankton,

the egg-ratio method was used (Borgmann

and others 1984), following Paloheimo

(1974). Temperature and species-specific values for

egg development time were determined from the

literature (see Kuns and Sprules 2000), and the

mean temperature of each stratum was used. Mean

dry weights for zooplankton were calculated using

lengthñweight regressions (McCauley 1984; Culver

and others 1985; Yan and Mackie 1987; Yan and

Pawson 1997; W.G. Sprules unpublished data).

Areal biweekly production was calculated by multiplying

volumetric production by the depth of the

stratum. All of our production estimates were calculated

at the genus level and then summed across

all taxa to obtain total crustacean zooplankton

production. Bythotrephes production was calculated

separately from the crustacean zooplankton community,

as we wanted to examine the effects of Bythotrephes as a predator on zooplankton productivity,

exclusive of its contribution to total zooplankton

productivity (for comparison, Bythotrephes

production is displayed in Figure 1). Biweekly Bythotrephes

consumption (mg m)2 fortnight)1) was

estimated by dividing Bythotrephes biweekly production

(mg m)2 fortnight)1; calculated by the eggratio

method from whole-water column samples)

by growth efficiency, which was estimated at 27%

for a population of mixed instars (Dumitru and

others 2001). Consumption by Bythotrephes was

contrasted with zooplankton production from the

epilimnion and metalimnion, as a concurrent study

in a subset of the lakes in our study suggests that

this is where the invader is generally found (Young

and Yan 2008). To assess the effects of Bythotrephes on trophic

interactions between zooplankton and phytoplankton,

an in situ experiment was conducted

three times in a subset of the study lakes: two invaded

and three reference lakes. Using a technique

modified from Elser and Goldman (1991), Cyr

(1998), and Sommer and others (2001), we measured

zooplankton impact on the phytoplankton

community, including direct grazing effects, but

also indirect effects, such as nutrient recycling, as no

nutrients were added to the carboys. Four translucent

20-l carboys were deployed for 72 h in each

lake, once during June, July, and August, approximately

4 weeks apart. Carboys were filled with

water and incubated at a depth corresponding to

50% light penetration, thereby minimizing between

lake differences in light exposure. Water was

filtered through 80-lm mesh to remove zooplankton

and added to each carboy. Zooplankton were

added to each of the carboys at several densities (0,

1, 2, and 3∑ ambient) by taking discrete hauls with a

closing net through each of the strata (epi-, meta-,

and hypolimnion), thus compensating for any diel

vertical migration that may have been occurring,

but also likely overestimating grazing due to the

presence of hypolimnetic taxa that would not be

feeding in the epilimnion during the day. The carboys

were then sealed, weighted, and incubated for

72 h. All predaceous macroinvertebrates, such as

Bythotrephes, were excluded from the carboys. By

removing Bythotrephes from the carboys, we are thus

explicitly testing how zooplankton communities

shaped by invasion will influence algal community

biomass in short-term experiments in invaded and

reference lakes. Although initial differences in the

composition of phytoplankton communities could

influence zooplankton grazing, the invaded and

reference lakes in this study have similar proportions

of edible phytoplankton cells (B. Beisner,

unpublished data), suggesting that conditions were

relatively comparable in invaded and reference

lakes. Chl a samples from each carboy were taken at

the beginning and end of the experiment, concentrating

water samples onto 1.2-lm glass fiber filters,

and measured using fluorometry. Following Cyr

(1998), the realized algal growth rates per day for

the carboys that contain zooplankton (r) were calculated

from

r º lnC1=C0ﬁ=T 1ﬁ

where C0 and C1 are the chl a concentrations (lg l)1)

at the beginning and end of the experiment,

respectively, and T is the length of time the experiment

ran (days). Zooplankton impact was calculated

as the slope (b) of the equation

r º bZBﬁ ˛ a 2ﬁ

where ZB is the zooplankton biomass at 0, 1, 2, or

3∑ ambient biomass and a is the growth rate in the

absence of zooplankton. Zooplankton biomass was

determined from the average of the two survey

sampling dates that surrounded the experiment.

The coefficients of the equation were estimated by

linear regression. Percent change in algae (per day)

was calculated as ()(1 ) eb) ∑ 100). Although this

experiment and others upon which it was modeled

(Elser and Goldman 1991; Cyr 1998) are brief, our

experiment was designed to provide insight into

possible trophic interactions that may result from

changes in lake food webs and should be looked

upon as a simplified test of the interaction between

zooplankton and phytoplankton without confounding

factors from higher trophic levels. One-way ANOVAs were used to examine differences

in physical, chemical, and morphological

characteristics of study lakes. Repeated measures

ANOVAs were used to test if there were differences

between invaded and reference lakes for chl a,

secondary production, zooplankton abundance,

and egg ratio (eggs individual)1). Because of nonnormality

and heteroskedasticity in some of the

above measures, all values were log (x + 1)-transformed.

The HuynhñFeldt adjusted P-value was

used in situations where the assumption of sphericity

was not met for repeated measures analyses.

Although we would expect to observe seasonal

changes in zooplankton communities, independent

of invasion status, it was not our intention to describe these changes; therefore, we will not discuss

time effect results unless there is an interaction

with invasion. A two-factor ANOVA was used to

test for differences in zooplankton grazing impact

over all three experimental time periods in invaded

and reference lakes, with time as a block factor.

Statistical analyses were performed using Statistica

6.0 (StatSoft 2001). 

xresults Reference and invaded lakes were similar in surface

area, maximum depth, and primary productivity

(chl a and total phosphorus) (Table 1), as well as

thermal structure (epilimnetic temperature:

F1,6 = 0.01, P = 0.98). There was also no significant

difference in concentrations of calcium and dissolved

organic carbon, pH, and conductivity between

lake categories (Table 1).

Zooplankton production was significantly lower

in the epilimnion of Bythotrephes-invaded lakes

throughout the summer, declining on average by

more than 6000 mg m)2 season)1, or about 67%

(Figure 2, Table 2). There was no difference in

metalimnetic or hypolimnetic production between

invaded and reference lakes (Figure 2, Table 2),

although the hypolimnions of two of the four invaded

lakes, Bernard and Harp, were 18∑ and 13∑

more productive than the average hypolimnetic

productivity of reference lakes (Figure 1). When all

of the strata were combined, there was no statistical

difference in whole-water column zooplankton

production between invaded and reference lakes

(Figures 1, 2 and Table 2).

In the epilimnion, production of calanoid copepods,

cyclopoid copepods, and small cladocerans

was significantly reduced in Bythotrephes-invaded

lakes (Figure 3 and Table 3). Epilimnetic production

by large cladocerans tended to be reduced in

Bythotrephes-invaded lakes, although not significantly.

There was a significant Time ∑ Invasion

interaction for small cladocerans, where production

in invaded lakes was high early in the season, but

declined precipitously from an average of

442 mg m)2 fortnight)1 in May and early June to

less than 2 mg m)2 fortnight)1 over the remainder

of the sampling dates (Figure 3 and Table 3). In the

metalimnion, production by cyclopoids, calanoids,

and small cladocerans was similar in reference and

invaded lakes, whereas large cladoceran production

was 90% lower in invaded lakes compared to reference

lakes, averaging 13 mg m)2 fortnight)1

over the season (Figure 3 and Table 3). In the

hypolimnion, cyclopoid copepods had higher production

in invaded lakes early in the season, followed

by a decrease beginning in mid-June, and

calanoid copepod production was significantly

greater in invaded lakes (Figure 3 and Table 3).

There was no difference in large and small cladoceran

hypolimnetic production between lake groups

(Figure 3 and Table 3).

The abundance of crustacean zooplankton in the

epilimnion was significantly affected in invaded

lakes, with declines of more than 33,000 individuals

m)3 over the summer, on average (Figure 4

and Table 2). There was also a significant

Time ∑ Invasion interaction, such that abundances

were similar in invaded and reference lakes in May

and early June, but showed significant declines in

the invaded lakes after this time. There was no

difference between invaded and reference lake

zooplankton abundance in the metalimnion, 


hypolimnion, and when all strata are combined,

nor were there any interactions between invasion

status and time (Figure 4 and Table 2).

Bythotrephes-invaded lakes had a marginally significant

increase in numbers of eggs produced per

individual zooplankter in the hypolimnion, which

was most noticeable early in the summer (Figure 5

and Table 2). This peak was likely driven by extremely

high egg production by hypolimnetic cyclopoid

copepods, producing on average more than

9000 eggs m)3 between the first and second sampling

dates (A. Strecker, unpublished data), far

greater numbers than other zooplankton of a similar

size, and had greater numbers of eggs per individual

in invaded lakes compared to reference lakes (Figure

5 and Table 4). When all strata were combined,

there was a marginally significant increase in eggs

produced per individual zooplankter in invaded

lakes compared to reference lakes on the first sampling

date (F1,6 = 3.82, P = 0.10). This early season

peak in number of eggs per individual in invaded

lakes came mostly from small cladoceran and cyclopoid

functional groups (Figure 5). There was no

significant effect of invasion on total or functional

group eggs per individual in the epilimnion, metalimnion,

or when all strata were combined, nor were

there any significant Time ∑ Invasion interactions

(Figure 5 and Table 2).

Bythotrephes consumed substantial portions of the

total seasonal zooplankton production in three of

the four invaded lakes (Figure 6), on average

consuming more than 1000 mg m)2 season)1 or

about 17% of secondary production from the

middle of May to the middle of September. However,

Bythotrephes did not tend to appear until mid-

June in our samples, thus zooplankton production

consumed after Bythotrephes starts reproducing is,

on average, about 34% (Figure 6). Bythotrephes

consumed greater than 100% of zooplankton production

on two sampling dates in Bernard Lake and

Harp Lake, but its consumption never exceeded

zooplankton production in Peninsula and Vernon

lakes. In general, Bythotrephes production was low,

only comprising less than 6% of total zooplankton

production, on average (Figure 1). In each grazing experiment, algae decreased in reference

lakes and increased in invaded lakes (Figure

7a). There was a significant effect of invasion on

zooplankton impact on the algal community (invasion:

F1,8 = 23.13, P < 0.01, time: F2,8 = 0.85,

P = 0.46), such that % change in algae increased in

the invaded lakes. However, this increase is likely

not biologically meaningful in the long term, as

changes in chl a in the experimental carboys were

typically less than 1 lg l)1. Indeed, there was no

significant difference in epilimnetic chl a concentrations

between lakes with and without Bythotrephes

throughout the entire season in the entire subset of

lakes sampled (Figure 7b and Table 1). xdiscussion
We found that the invasive invertebrate predator,

Bythotrephes, altered some measures of ecosystem

function in freshwater lakes, such as epilimnetic

secondary production, but that other measures

were generally unchanged. There was some evidence

for seasonal shifts in the production of different

functional groups and individual egg

production in invaded lakes in May and early June,

but this was not great enough to balance production

lost to Bythotrephes consumption later in the

season. The effects of Bythotrephes on whole lake

productivity may be moderated by behavioral shifts

in zooplankton abundance to the cool dark waters

of the hypolimnion and/or increased abundance of

hypolimnetic species, and consequently, increased

production in the hypolimnion of some lakes. Bythotrephes

cannot compensate for the declines in

biomass production observed in invaded lakes, as it

generated less than 6% of total zooplankton production.

Our study provides compelling evidence

that Bythotrephes can alter the flow of energy in

parts of freshwater lakes, but may leave other

measures of ecosystem function relatively unaffected.

Changes in energy flow will likely have

implications for growth and reproduction of other

trophic levels in the food web, including macroinvertebrates,

planktivorous fish, and young-of-year

piscivorous fish, because these organisms all rely on

zooplankton as a major food source. There was a significant decrease in epilimnetic

zooplankton production in lakes invaded by Bythotrephes.

This was likely the result of significant

reductions in zooplankton abundance in the epilimnion,

as there was no difference in other factors

that influence productivity, such as egg production, chl a, and temperature, in invaded lakes compared

to non-invaded lakes. Although previous studies

have observed declines in overall zooplankton

abundance (Yan and others 2001; Strecker and

others 2006), this is the first study to detect negative

effects of Bythotrephes on epilimnetic zooplankton

production in multiple lakes and reduced

production in several functional groups (calanoids,

cyclopoids, and small cladocerans) within the epilimnion.

The substantial declines in epilimnetic

production are likely the result of a combination of

direct predation on zooplankton by Bythotrephes, as

well as behavioral shifts away from the epilimnion

to cooler darker habitat. Although we cannot

determine the relative importance of predation vs.

migration, what remains is that the epilimnion of

lakes has dramatically changed following the

invasion of Bythotrephes, and that there is significantly

less productivity available to foraging species.

Although few studies exist that compare

secondary productivity across different predatory

regimes, our results are similar in magnitude to

those observed in a fish biomanipulation experiment,

where the introduction of piscivores into a

piscivore-free lake resulted in reductions in planktivorous

fish, increased biomass of the native

invertebrate predator Chaoborus, and significant

declines in zooplankton productivity (Ramcharan

and others 2001). This suggests that the introduction

of non-native species can act in an analogous

fashion to the complete restructuring of a lake food

web by the introduction of a top predator.

We observed an increase in productivity in the

hypolimnion in some invaded lakes, which likely

results from predator-induced habitat shifts. As

discussed above, diel vertical migrations of zooplankton

can confound estimations of secondary

productivity. However, it is unlikely that these

migrations influenced our estimates of epilimnetic

or hypolimnetic production because we have no

evidence that zooplankton migrated downwards

from the epilimnion at night, and zooplankton

migration upwards from the hypolimnion at night

was minor (S. Arnott, unpublished). However, we

may have underestimated metalimnetic production

in invaded lakes, as diel migrations from the warmer

epilimnion at night to the cooler metalimnion

during the day may be a response of some zooplankton

taxa to Bythotrephes. Dumitru and others

(2001) examined the effect of Bythotrephes on

whole-water column zooplankton production in a

single lake, and therefore did not consider the

spatial distribution of production. Pangle and Peacor

(2006) and Pangle and others (2007) demonstrated

that Bythotrephes can induce cladoceran taxa

to migrate into the hypolimnion to avoid predation,

with significant costs as a result of exposure to

cooler temperatures: our results extend their findings

to the entire zooplankton community over a

greater part of the ice-free season. The non-lethal

costs of these migrations may be substantial. Using

Harp Lake as an example, we estimate that epilimnetic

production would be about 44% greater if

approximately 50% of zooplankton (based on differences

in hypolimnetic abundance between Harp

and reference lakes) in the hypolimnion of Harp

Lake are epilimnetic species that have behaviorally

shifted habitats to avoid Bythotrephes. There was considerable among-lake variability in

response to the invasion of Bythotrephes. Although

the hypolimnion of some invaded lakes made

substantial (>25%) contributions to total seasonal

productivity, the hypolimnion contributed very

little to overall productivity in other invaded lakes

(<4%). This variability in invaded lakes may be

partly due to differing planktivore communities.

Planktivores may influence the vertical distribution

of Bythotrephes, which may, in turn, influence the

distribution of zooplankton. A concurrent study in

two of our invaded lakes revealed that Bythotrephes

distribution is indeed related to the presence of the

cold-water planktivore, cisco (Young and Yan

2008), suggesting that other components of the

food web may mediate the effects of Bythotrephes on

crustacean zooplankton.

In addition to spatial shifts in productivity, we

observed seasonal shifts in invaded lakes during

periods when Bythotrephes was not present, that is,

in the spring before population growth rates increase.

In three of the four invaded lakes, there was

a large pulse in small cladoceran epilimnetic production

early in the season, likely from above

average egg production per individual small cladoceran

in two of the invaded lakes, in combination

with greater abundances in May and early

June. This suggests that small cladocerans may alter

their life history, at least in some lakes, by shifting

reproduction to earlier in the season to avoid the

invader. This is in agreement with another field

study, where temporal shifts in copepod egg production

were observed as a result of the presence of

a fish predator (Hairston and Walton 1986).

Increased production of other intermediate trophic

levels may offset reduced epilimnetic crustacean

production. For instance, rotifers were more

abundant in lakes invaded by Bythotrephes, especially

the colonial Conochilus (Hovius and others

2006), which has high intrinsic rates of increase

(Allan 1976) and is probably an inedible prey item

for Bythotrephes. However, rotifers likely do not substitute for crustacean zooplankton as prey for

fish (Threlkeld 1988). In addition, Sherwood and

others (2002) showed that the lack of large-bodied

prey groups could reduce the efficiency of energy

transfer to fish in metal-polluted lakes with simplified

food webs, implying that the loss of typical

prey in invaded lakes may prevent higher trophic

levels from reaching their normal body size. The spatial, temporal, and taxonomic redistribution

of secondary production in Bythotrephes-invaded

lakes will likely have important implications

for aquatic food webs. Shifts in zooplankton

reproduction from the epilimnion to the hypolimnion

may negatively affect epilimnetic-feeding fish

species that rely on zooplankton, such as larval

cisco, which inhabit surface waters (Oyadomari

and Auer 2004), and are highly reliant on crustaceans

as their prey (Davis and Todd 1998). In

addition, cold-water planktivores (that is, adult

cisco) would be unlikely to benefit from this shift

because they have reduced foraging success in

poorly lit waters (Milne and others 2005) and tend

to prefer temperatures around 12C (Rudstam and

Magnuson 1985), which falls into the metalimnion

in most of our lakes. Despite experimental results that were suggestive

of reduced control of the algal community by the

zooplankton community, we did not observe the

expected changes in phytoplankton biomass (as

measured by chl a) at the lake level in Bythotrephes- invaded lakes. Even though low-productivity lakes,

such as those in our study, are predicted to be

influenced more by bottom-up, rather than topdown,

forces (Jeppeson and others 2003), significant

effects of zooplankton on phytoplankton biomass

have been observed in other oligotrophic

lakes (Sarnelle and Knapp 2005). The weak overall

effects of zooplankton on phytoplankton echo the

experimental results of Sommer and others (2001),

where increased abundance of zooplankton functional

groups had no effect on total phytoplankton

biomass. Pe¥rez-Fuentetaja and others (2000) also

found that zooplankton had a weak influence on

chlorophyll in oligo- and meso-trophic lakes. Thus,

it appears that the invasion of Bythotrephes will

probably not have a large cascading effect on

phytoplankton biomass in lower productivity lakes,

despite large reductions in epilimnetic zooplankton

biomass (>70%). However, more productive lakes

may be more likely to respond to top-down changes

(Jeppesen and others 2003), and although Bythotrephes

seems to prefer oligotrophic lakes, it has

been found in some mesotrophic systems (Jarnagin

and others 2000), suggesting that the invader may

have the potential to instigate increases in algal

biomass in lakes of moderate productivity.