xabstract
The relative importance of top-down invader effects relative to environmental drivers was determined by
sampling crustacean zooplankton, rotifer, and phytoplankton communities in a set of invaded and noninvaded
reference lakes. The non-native invertebrate predator Bythotrephes had significant effects on zooplankton
community size structure, rotifers, and phytoplankton taxonomic composition, but no significant effects on
crustacean zooplankton taxonomic and functional group composition. Part of the variation in phytoplankton
communities was explained by the presence of the invader. Because Bythotrephes is generally known to be a
carnivore and to not consume phytoplankton, this effect is likely mediated by the zooplankton community’s
response to environmental gradients. Although Bythotrephes appears to indirectly alter phytoplankton
composition in invaded lakes, there was no evidence of a trophic cascade, and edible phytoplankton biovolume
did not increase in invaded lakes. These complex direct and indirect interactions suggest that effects of invaders
may be highly context-dependent, and therefore pose a significant challenge for predicting wider community and
ecosystem responses.

xintroduction
Cascading effects of predators are common in aquatic
systems and may be more noticeable following the
introduction of novel predators (Carpenter et al. 1987;
McCann et al. 1998). Range expansion of invasive
predators can provide natural experiments with which to
examine altered interactions among trophic levels at the
whole-ecosystem scale. In terrestrial ecosystems, invasive
predators have larger effects on prey communities compared
to native predators (Salo et al. 2007), but their
cascading effects have rarely been explored in aquatic
ecosystems. The consequences of invasions for nonadjacent
lower trophic levels remain largely unexplored and are
difficult to predict because there can be large variation in
the strength of top-down effects among lake ecosystems
(Shurin et al. 2002). In particular, oligotrophic lakes are
more likely to show weak top-down effects at lower trophic
levels because of strong bottom-up forces (McQueen et al.
1986; Leibold et al. 1997; Jeppesen et al. 2003).
It has been suggested that mid-trophic-level invaders
may have disproportionately large effects on food webs
(Shuter and Mason 2001; Noonburg and Byers 2005). The
cladoceran zooplankter Bythotrephes longimanus is an
invasive predator in North America, where it occupies a
mid-trophic-level position in lakes. It has had large effects
on pelagic herbivore community structure, biomass, and
productivity in North American lakes (Yan et al. 2002;
Boudreau and Yan 2003; Strecker and Arnott 2008). Based
on the strong effects of this invader on herbivorous
zooplankton, we would expect to see strong cascading
effects on lower trophic levels, including changes in
taxonomic composition, size, and structure, and functional
group composition in the phytoplankton. However, Bythotrephes
is most commonly found in low-productivity
lakes (MacIsaac et al. 2000). Thus, it is unclear whether
cascading effects of the invader should attenuate rapidly or
be expressed with equal strength at the lower trophic level.
The rapid invasion of Bythotrephes into a large set of
morphologically and chemically similar lakes in central
Ontario created a unique opportunity to analyze replicated
natural, whole-lake experiments on lower food web
responses to invasion. Although previous studies have
demonstrated strong effects of Bythotrephes on the
adjacent trophic level (zooplankton: Barbiero and Tuchman
2004; Hovius et al. 2006; Strecker et al. 2006), the
effect on primary producers has remained largely unexplored.
To our knowledge, no studies have examined the
effects of Bythotrephes on phytoplankton community
composition, although an experimental mesocosm study
did demonstrate increases in phytoplankton abundance
with invasion, suggestive of a trophic cascade (Strecker and
Arnott 2005). Furthermore, the contribution of Bythotrephes
in shaping plankton communities relative to the
role of other important environmental drivers (Watson et
al. 1997; Beisner et al. 2006; Keller 2009) is not well
understood. Based on food web theory, one might expect
that herbivorous zooplankton should be more affected by
top-down influences, whereas phytoplankton communities,
being lower in the food chain, should be shaped more
strongly by bottom-up effects (McQueen et al. 1986).
Indeed, this pattern has been recently demonstrated in
comparative studies of boreal shield lakes (Paterson et al.
2008).
Our objective was to assess whether Bythotrephes
induces patterns in planktonic food webs that are indicative
of a trophic cascade. Further, we were interested in
determining if trophic cascades would manifest in the
traditional form (e.g., changes in phytoplankton biomass)
or in a more subtle form (e.g., shifts in phytoplankton
composition). We accomplished this by contrasting phytoplankton,
rotifer, and zooplankton community structure in
invaded and noninvaded lakes in a region of rapid range
expansion of the invader. This was done by surveying a
relatively large set of lakes at multiple times throughout the
summer. We predicted that traditional trophic cascades
would be weak or absent in the low-productivity lakes that
are characteristically invaded by Bythotrephes (MacIsaac et
al. 2000), because phytoplankton would be more strongly
influenced by environmental factors, but that more subtle
cascades may result from indirect effects of Bythotrephes on
the zooplankton community.

xmethods
Twenty-two lakes in the districts of Muskoka
and Parry Sound, and the county of Haliburton in Ontario,
Canada, were sampled from May to September 2003. There
were 15 invaded and 7 reference lakes, including the
recently invaded Maple Lake, which was classified in our
study as a reference system, since only one Bythotrephes
individual was found throughout the summer. Two of our
noninvaded reference lakes are part of a long-term
monitoring program; sampling details can be found in
Paterson et al. (2008) and Yan et al. (2008).
All of the lakes chosen for the study have relatively
similar physical, chemical, and morphological characteristics
(Table 1); however, there were some differences
between lake categories (assessed with a nonparametric
Wilcoxon rank test). Invaded lakes tended to have higher
alkalinity, calcium, conductivity, NH4, pH, and sodium
(not shown), and were deeper and larger (Table 1). These
differences were generally small, as would be expected from
lakes located in a geologically similar region, and are
typical of the broader patterns of invasion in the region
(Weisz and Yan 2010). The morphological differences in
invaded lakes compared to noninvaded lakes may reflect
Bythotrephes preference for large deep lakes (MacIsaac et
al. 2000), but it is more likely an artifact of the recent
history of invasions in North America. The spread of
Bythotrephes is largely controlled by human-delivered
propagules, and propagule pressure is higher in larger
lakes (Muirhead and MacIsaac 2005). Lake depth is known
to influence zooplankton community structure, primarily
because deeper lakes are more likely to contain glacial relict
species, such as Mysis relicta and Senecella calanoides
(Dadswell 1974), which are zooplankton predators. However,
we purposely chose lakes with a common glacial
history (with the exception of two reference lakes, Blue
Chalk and Red Chalk Main, for which preliminary
analyses indicated that zooplankton communities did not
differ substantially from the other reference lakes; A.
Strecker unpubl.). Thus, lake size likely did not confound
our interpretation of responses of the crustacean zooplankton
community to Bythotrephes invasion. Furthermore,
lake size per se is not expected to have a major influence on
phytoplankton or rotifer community structure, independent
of its effects on temperature and stratification type
(Wetzel 2001). Summer epilimnetic temperatures and
depths were similar in both invaded and noninvaded lakes
(July and August: A. Strecker unpubl.); therefore, differences
in lake size likely did not affect our interpretation of
invasion effects on phytoplankton or rotifer community
structure. Lakes contained a combination of warm-water
planktivores (e.g., yellow perch [Perca flavescens]) and
cold-water planktivores (e.g., lake trout [Salvelinus namaycush],
lake herring [Coregonus artedii], rainbow smelt
[Osmerus mordax], and lake whitefish [Coregonus clupeaformis];
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources unpubl.).
Lakes were sampled every 2 weeks from mid-May until
September. At the deep station in each lake, temperature
and dissolved oxygen were measured, and samples were
taken for crustacean zooplankton, rotifers, and phytoplankton.
Crustacean zooplankton were sampled from 5 m
off the lake bottom to the surface using a 110-mm mesh net,
0.5 m in diameter, which was pulled vertically through the
water column. Zooplankton in samples were anesthetized
and preserved in 5.5% sugared and buffered formalin.
Separate samples were taken in July and August for rotifers
and phytoplankton from the epilimnion using a 2-cm diameter,
9-m-long vertical tube sampler. The median July–
August epilimnetic depth was 5.3 m, ranging from a
minimum of 3.4 m to a maximum of 7.8 m. Although
phytoplankton can also be abundant in deeper depth
strata, we chose to sample in the epilimnion because our
main goal was to observe effects of Bythotrephes, which is
most abundant in the epilimnion in lakes in this region
(Young and Yan 2008). Rotifers were anesthetized, and
both rotifers and phytoplankton were preserved with
Lugol’s solution. Samples for rotifers and phytoplankton
were also taken at one additional station located 500 m
from the deep station, and the two samples were pooled for
enumeration. Bythotrephes was sampled at the deep station
and four additional stations (, 1 km) from June to
September using a 400-mm mesh net, 0.5 m in diameter,
which was towed vertically from 5 m off the lake bottom to
the surface.
Composite zooplankton and phytoplankton samples
were obtained by pooling equal proportions of each of
the nine biweekly zooplankton samples (May to September)
and the five biweekly phytoplankton samples (July and
August). Composite samples may lead to imprecise
estimates of species abundance by over- or under-representing
certain taxa; however, a concurrent study in a
subset of our study lakes found that crustacean zooplankton
taxa were present, on average, on . 50% of sampling
dates (A. Strecker unpubl.). Additionally, our counting
protocol was designed to target rare species; thus, this likely
represents a small source of variability in our results.
Rotifer samples were enumerated from the same five
biweekly summer sampling dates and averaged. Crustacean
zooplankton were generally identified to species, and
juvenile copepods and macroinvertebrates were excluded.
Zooplankton species were grouped into size classes (0–0.4,
0.4–0.8, 0.8–1.2, 1.2–1.6, and . 1.6 mm) derived from a
concurrent study in a subset of our study lakes (Strecker
and Arnott 2008), and they were assigned to functional
groups using the classification of Barnett et al. (2007)
(Table 2). Rotifers were identified to genus, and phytoplankton
were identified to species but grouped at the
family level for analyses (i.e., bacillariophyceae, chlorophyceae,
chrysophyceae, cryptophyceae, pyrrhophyceae,
cyanophyceae). Phytoplankton were also classified into
size classes (, 10, 10–20, 20–35, . 35 mm) and functional
groups (motile unicellular, motile colonial, nonmotile
colonial, nonmotile unicellular, filamentous, and weakly
filamentous). Phytoplankton biovolumes were estimated
from geometric shapes (Paterson et al. 2008). Rotifer data
were only available for 14 lakes (10 invaded and 4
reference: Table 1). For additional details on sampling and
enumeration, see Hovius et al. (2006) and Strecker et al.
(2006).
Depth-integrated epilimnetic samples for chemical analyses
(alkalinity, calcium, dissolved organic carbon, conductivity,
magnesium, NH4, NO3, total Kjeldahl nitrogen,
pH, total phosphorus [TP], potassium, silica, and sodium)
were taken in mid-July 2003 at the deep station of each
lake. Following Ontario Ministry of the Environment
(2003) protocols, samples were filtered through an 80-mm
mesh in the field to remove zooplankton in order to
decrease variability of TP due to sporadic inclusion of
zooplankton in water samples of these low-productivity
lakes.
Multivariate ordination techniques
were used to test the relative contributions of Bythotrephes
and other environmental variables in explaining variation
in crustacean zooplankton, rotifer, and phytoplankton
communities. Redundancy analysis (RDA) was performed
using Canoco 4.5 (ter Braak and Sˇ milauer 2002), because
preliminary analyses using detrended correspondence
analysis suggested that linear ordination techniques were
appropriate. Species data were Hellinger-transformed prior
to analysis because the Euclidean distance measure used in
RDA is inappropriate for raw data containing many null
values (Legendre and Gallagher 2001). Because there were
large numbers of predictor variables in comparison to the
number of sites, many of which were also highly correlated,
we reduced the variables into independent linear combinations
of variables using principal components analysis
(PCA) (see Graham [2003] for use in multiple regression).
For example, we constructed a PCA from variables that
describe the morphological and physical characteristics of
lakes, such as elevation, maximum depth, Secchi depth, and
surface area (hereafter morphological PCA). Additionally,
a PCA was performed on chemical variables (chemical
PCA), and a principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) was
performed on pelagic planktivore fish community composition
(presence or absence: fish PCoA). The scores of each
lake on axis I and axis II were then used in redundancy
analyses, since these axes represented a large part of the
variability in physical, morphological, chemical, and
planktivorous fish community characteristics: Morphological
PCA axes I and II captured 49% and 28% of variation,
respectively, chemical PCA axes I and II explained 47%
and 24% of variation, respectively, and fish PCoA axes I
and II explained 41% and 30% of variation, respectively
(Table 3). Separate PCAs and PCoAs were also performed
on the subset of lakes used for the analysis of rotifer
taxonomic composition (14 lakes); these analyses yielded
similar results to the full 22 lake data set (Table 3).
Bythotrephes was entered as a binary variable (presence or
absence), and an additional variable of time since invasion
was tested (Table 1). Variables were considered significant
at p , 0.05.
Variation partitioning was used to separate significant
variation explained by Bythotrephes, environmental variables,
and any covariation between the invader and the
environment (Peres-Neto et al. 2006). The method used
controls for the inflated variance that occurs with increased
numbers of variables in ordinations and, therefore, will
enact a greater penalty on the environmental data set,
which contains more variables compared to the Bythotrephes
data set, which contains two variables (presence or
absence, time since invasion). Variation partitioning and
significance testing of environmental and Bythotrephes
variables (5000 permutations) were conducted in the R
library vegan (R Development Core Team 2010). Note that
significance testing cannot be performed on the covariation
term between Bythotrephes and the environment.
Finally, we used structural equation modeling (SEM) to
elucidate the nature of the interactions between variables.
SEM is a technique that allows variables to simultaneously
be predictors and responses, and, therefore, it can be useful
in testing theories about causal relationships in complex
networks (Grace 2006). A theoretical model is specified a
priori, and thus, if the observed data are a good fit to the
model, there is support for the relationships identified in
the theoretical model. For example, SEM has been
successfully used to confirm the direct and indirect
pathways that were hypothesized to operate in kelp–
invertebrate coastal ecosystems (Arkema et al. 2009). Our
small sample size (n 5 22) precluded the usage of SEM as a
confirmatory technique; rather, it must be seen as an
exploratory assessment of our observational data (Kline
2005). Because we were interested in specific interactions,
e.g., the direct and indirect influence of water chemistry
and Bythotrephes on zooplankton and phytoplankton, we
ran two separate models testing the variables that are
known to influence both zooplankton and phytoplankton
(chemistry axis I and morphological axis I), as well as
Bythotrephes. We used the R library sem (structural
equation models: Fox 2006) to estimate standardized path
coefficients, test model fit, and generate R2 values for the
amount of variation explained by our models. Models were
fit by maximum likelihood, and Bayesian information
criteria (BIC) scores were generated, where lower scores
indicate more parsimonious models. The strength of
indirect interactions was estimated by multiplying the
standardized path coefficients (e.g., the indirect effect of
morphological axis I on phytoplankton 5 direct effect of
morphological axis I on zooplankton 3 direct effect of
zooplankton on phytoplankton) (Grace 2006). An important
distinction in SEM is that a model is considered a good
fit when there are no significant differences (p . 0.05)
between expected and observed covariances, as assessed
with a x2 test (Grace 2006).

xresults
Bythotrephes variables were important predictors of
crustacean zooplankton community size structure, explaining
23% of variation (p 5 0.01), but they were not
significant for other zooplankton metrics, explaining only
5% of variation in taxonomic structure (p 5 0.09) and 8%
of variation in functional groups (p 5 0.14) (Fig. 1).
Bythotrephes variables also explained a significant amount
of variation in rotifer community taxonomic composition
(61% of variation: p 5 0.04) (Fig. 1). Environmental
variables explained significant variation in crustacean
zooplankton size structure (34% of variation: p , 0.01)
and taxonomic structure (18% of variation: p , 0.01)
(Fig. 1). Environmental variables did not explain significant
variation in zooplankton functional groups (8% of
variation: p 5 0.24) (Fig. 1) or rotifer community
composition (9%: p 5 0.36) (Fig. 1). Covariation between
the invader and environmental variables also failed to
explain any variability in crustacean zooplankton or rotifer
communities (Fig. 1). The compositional effects of environmental
variables and Bythotrephes on crustacean
zooplankton and rotifer communities have been welldescribed
elsewhere (Hovius et al. 2006; Strecker et al.
2006); please see Fig. 2 for specific relationships between
variables and communities. It is worth noting that
Bythotrephes presence is significant in some ordination
biplots, but Bythotrephes variables are not significant in the
variation partitioning analysis (see Figs. 1, 2): this likely
reflects the weak effect of the additional variable, time since
invasion.
Bythotrephes variables explained significant independent
variation in phytoplankton taxonomic groups (13% of
variation purely explained: p 5 0.03) but did not have a
significant influence on variation in functional groups (3%
of variation: p 5 0.24) (Fig. 1). Additionally, Bythotrephes
did not explain variation in phytoplankton size structure
(2% of variation: p 5 0.34): There was no difference in
edible phytoplankton (, 35 mm) biovolume in invaded
lakes compared to noninvaded lakes (invaded:
1280 mm3 mL21 6 99; noninvaded: 1214 6 98 mm3 mL21,
t-test, t 5 21.47, df 5 20, p 5 0.16). Because it is possible
that changes in phytoplankton in invaded systems may be
more pronounced in lakes at higher trophic status (i.e.,
oligotrophic–mesotrophic), we assessed the deviation of
edible phytoplankton biovolume in invaded lakes from the
average biovolume in noninvaded lakes along a gradient of
trophic status, as measured by total phosphorus. Trophic
status had no effect on invaded lake edible phytoplankton
biovolume (R2 5 0.05, p 5 0.41). Environmental variables
accounted for minor and insignificant variation in phytoplankton
size structure (11% of variation: p 5 0.17) and
functional groups (10% of variation: p 5 0.12) (Fig. 1).
However, environmental variables explained a significant
portion of variation in phytoplankton taxonomic structure
(23% variation: p 5 0.02) (Fig. 1). Covariation between
Bythotrephes and environmental variables accounted for
some variation in phytoplankton community size structure
(12%), functional groups (7%), and taxonomic structure
(3%) (note that significance of this fraction cannot be
tested; Fig. 1). See Fig. 3 for specific relationships between
variables and phytoplankton communities.
Because past studies have not documented significant
independent effects of Bythotrephes on phytoplankton
taxonomic structure, we expand on this result here.
Chlorophytes and cyanophytes were positively correlated
with: (1) chemical PCA axis I (representing conductivity
and ionic strength; Table 3), (2) morphological PCA axis I
(representing lake size and depth; Table 3), and (3)
Bythotrephes presence (Fig. 3b). Chrysophytes were opposite
in direction to chlorophytes and cyanophytes (Fig. 3b).
Cyanophytes and pyrrhophytes were positively related to
Bythotrephes, while bacillariophytes were uncorrelated with
the presence of the invader (Fig. 3b). Additionally, we
tested for differences in the log-transformed biovolumes of
specific phytoplankton taxonomic groups that our ordinations
identified as correlated with Bythotrephes: Pyrrhophyte
biovolume was significantly greater in invaded
compared to noninvaded lakes (t-test, t 5 22.26, df 5
20, p 5 0.03), whereas chrysophyte biovolume was
significantly smaller in invaded lakes compared to noninvaded
lakes (t-test, t 5 4.10, df 5 20, p , 0.01).
Cyanophyte biovolume was slightly greater in invaded
lakes than in noninvaded lakes, but not significantly so (ttest,
t 5 21.84, df 5 20, p 5 0.08). Although slight
differences in sampling protocols may have led to a greater
representation by metalimnetic colonial chrysophytes in
Blue Chalk and Red Chalk lakes, chrysophytes were 33
more abundant in the remainder of noninvaded lakes
compared to invaded lakes (t-test, t 5 3.35, df 5 20, p ,
0.01), suggesting that the high correlation with RDA axis I
is not an artifact.
Because previous research has found little evidence of
omnivory by Bythotrephes (Schulz and Yurista 1995), we
infer that effects of the invader on algal communities are
operating indirectly through the zooplankton community.
We explored the importance of zooplankton in shaping the
covariation effect between Bythotrephes and environmental
variables on phytoplankton size structure by directly
incorporating zooplankton community size structure into
ordination analyses. Here, we partitioned variation between
three compartments: environment, Bythotrephes, and
zooplankton. Like the two-compartment variation partitioning,
this analysis allows us to control for covariation
among variables and assess independent and shared
contributions from sets of variables. We chose to use
zooplankton size structure because this grouping was most
influenced by environmental variables and Bythotrephes
(Fig. 1). If the effect of Bythotrephes on phytoplankton is
truly indirect and mediated through zooplankton, then we
should predictably see a large reduction in independent
variation explained by the invader. In contrast to the twocompartment
test, Bythotrephes and environmental variables
explained no independent variation in the threecompartment
test, and only a moderate fraction of shared
variation in phytoplankton size (10%; Fig. 4). However,
shared variation between environment and zooplankton
explained 26% of variation in phytoplankton size structure,
and shared variation between zooplankton and Bytho-
trephes and among all three sets of variables accounted for
an additional 11% and 2% of algal community size
structure, respectively (Fig. 4). This suggests that the effect
of Bythotrephes on phytoplankton communities may be
mediated via the invader’s effect on the zooplankton
community along gradients of environmental conditions.
To further explore possible mechanisms that may be
driving the effects of Bythotrephes, zooplankton, and
environmental factors on phytoplankton community structure,
we used the site scores from chemical PCA axis I and
morphological PCA axis I as examples of indirect
interactions. Chemical axis I was positively correlated with
various ions, including Ca and K, as well as pH and
alkalinity, whereas morphological axis I was correlated
with area and depth (Table 3). Both axes were significant in
phytoplankton ordinations (Fig. 3). Calcium (Pinel-Alloul
et al. 1995; Jeziorski et al. 2008), other ions (Pinel-Alloul et
al. 1990), pH (Sprules 1975), and lake size (Keller and
Conlon 1994) are known to influence crustacean zooplankton
community structure. We used linear regression to
compare the responses of phytoplankton in invaded and
reference lakes to chemical and morphological axis I. Given
that we saw the greatest covariation effect for phytoplankton
size structure, we explored this further using the
biovolume most likely to be affected by herbivorous
cladocerans and copepods, edible phytoplankton (,
35 mm).
Edible phytoplankton biovolume was not significantly
influenced by chemical axis I (invaded: R2 5 0.13, p 5 0.19;
not invaded: R2 5 0.06, p 5 0.64; Fig. 5a) or morphological
axis I (invaded: R2 5 0.03, p 5 0.49; not invaded: R2 5
0.27, p 5 0.29; Fig. 5c). Additionally, the biomass of the
major herbivore group responsive to Bythotrephes invasion
(cladoceran zooplankton) did not change significantly
along chemistry axis I in invaded lakes (R2 5 0.23, p 5
0.07) or noninvaded lakes (R2 5 0.02, p 5 0.78) (Fig. 5b).
However, cladoceran biomass declined significantly along
morphological axis I in invaded lakes (R2 5 0.43, p , 0.01)
but was unaffected by lake morphology in noninvaded
lakes (R2 5 0.17, p 5 0.36) (Fig. 5d). The lack of
directional change along environmental gradients in both
cladoceran zooplankton and edible phytoplankton in
noninvaded lakes suggests that cladoceran zooplankton
grazers were either in balance with their food resources or
not controlling edible phytoplankton in noninvaded lakes.
The lower biomass of cladocerans and their decrease along
morphological axis I without a corresponding increase in
phytoplankton response in invaded lakes support the latter
hypothesis: We explored this further by examining the
relationship between cladoceran biomass and edible phytoplankton
biovolume (Fig. 6). We observed no significant
relationship between cladoceran biomass and edible phytoplankton
biovolume in either instance, further supporting
the latter hypothesis (noninvaded lakes: R2 5 0.47, p 5
0.13; invaded lakes: R2 5 0.02, p 5 0.64; Fig. 6).
Finally, we assessed the strength of the direct and
indirect interactions among water chemistry and morphological
variables, Bythotrephes, cladoceran biomass, and
edible phytoplankton biovolume using structural equation
models (SEM) (Fig. 7). The model with morphological axis
I was an adequate fit to our observed data (i.e., no
significant differences between the expected and observed
model; model x2 5 5.34, p 5 0.07), whereas the model that
included chemistry axis I was not a good fit (model x2 5
9.94, p 5 0.01) (Fig. 7); therefore, we will not consider the
chemistry model further. In agreement with our other
analyses, morphological axis I had moderate and nonsignificant
direct effects on edible phytoplankton, as did
cladoceran zooplankton (Fig. 7). However, morphological
axis I had significant direct effects on cladocerans, which,
when combined with the effects of cladocerans on edible
phytoplankton, had substantial indirect effects on edible
phytoplankton (20.60 3 20.42 5 0.25; Fig. 7). In
contrast, Bythotrephes had an indirect positive effect on
edible phytoplankton biovolume that was weaker than the
effects of morphological axis I (20.30 3 20.42 5 0.13;
Fig. 7).

xdiscussion
We observed patterns in the lower food web that are
consistent with both indirect and direct effects of Bythotrephes
on planktonic communities in freshwater lakes.
Two main types of effects could be distinguished. First,
there were top-down effects on crustacean zooplankton and
rotifers related to Bythotrephes presence. We found
significant effects of Bythotrephes on zooplankton community
size structure, but not composition. This is in contrast
to other studies that have documented strong effects of
Bythotrephes on zooplankton community biodiversity and
the loss of some cladoceran species (Boudreau and Yan
2003; Barbiero and Tuchman 2004; Hovius et al. 2007).
Changes in the composition of the zooplankton community
suggest that the invasion of Bythotrephes may have
significant consequences for size-related aspects of the
zooplankton community functioning, such as grazing and
metabolism. It is important to note that the top-down
effects that have been observed between Bythotrephes and
crustacean zooplankton include both direct consumptive
and indirect nonlethal effects (Pangle et al. 2007), which
will accentuate the effects on zooplankton community
metabolism.
The second main type of effect that we were able to
detect with our comparative survey was indirect effects of
invasion on phytoplankton communities. We found evidence
for significant responses in phytoplankton taxonomic
composition in the epilimnion of Bythotrephes-invaded
lakes but no change in phytoplankton biomass (Figs. 1, 3).
This concurs with our hypothesis that traditional trophic
cascades resulting in changes in biomass would be absent
from these oligotrophic lakes, but that more subtle shifts in
phytoplankton community composition may result from an
invasion. To determine the nature of the influence of
Bythotrephes on phytoplankton, it was necessary to
incorporate both environmental variation and zooplankton
size structure into our models. Joint control of lower
trophic levels from both top-down and bottom-up factors
has been demonstrated previously (Leibold et al. 1997 and
references therein), and it is not unreasonable to expect that
environmental variables can affect both phytoplankton and
zooplankton, generating indirect trophic interactions. We
demonstrated these interactions with structural equation
models (SEMs) on environmental variables that are
representative of gradients across lakes (chemical and
morphological axis I). Many environmental variables,
including calcium and lake size, can have significant
influences on crustacean zooplankton community structure
(Keller and Conlon 1994; Jeziorski et al. 2008). We found
that the chemical model was a poor fit to the data, but that
the morphological model was a good fit, indicating that
indirect trophic interactions are important structuring
forces in these systems. These indirect trophic interactions
are mediated by Bythotrephes: Morphological scores had a
lesser effect on cladocerans in invaded lakes compared to
noninvaded lakes (significant invasion effect: morphological
analysis of covariance [ANCOVA] F1,18 5 9.46, p ,
0.01). Thus, what appears to be an effect of the
environment (e.g., lake size gradient) on edible phytoplankton
in invaded lakes is instead partially a result of a
decoupling of the predator–prey interaction between the
most competitive herbivores (cladocerans) and their phytoplankton
prey. This decoupling likely results from
reduced abundance of cladocerans, particularly the important
grazers such as Daphnia spp. Strayer et al. (2008)
found similar complex indirect interactions between environmental
drivers and the grazing effects of another
invader (the zebra mussel, Dreissena polymorpha) in the
Hudson River. These types of complex relationships
between the environment and invasive species may render
the prediction of effects and the management of invaders
more context-dependent than previously acknowledged,
necessitating the inclusion of environmental gradients in
studies of invasions. In particular, this should be the case
for mid-trophic-level invaders, for which many links with
other members of the food web are possible.
Top-down effects of Bythotrephes (independent of
environment) were attenuated somewhat at the primaryproducer
trophic level. Other studies in this region have
detected declines in zooplankton biomass (Boudreau and
Yan 2003) in addition to the changes we document here.
Such changes to zooplankton community structure and
biomass would lead us to expect concomitant changes in
the phytoplankton community (biovolume and composition)
(Cyr 1998). While we observed changes in phytoplankton
composition attributable to Bythotrephes, we did
not observe the expected significant increases in lakewide
phytoplankton biovolume. Results from previous studies
are equivocal on this matter. Lack of increases in
phytoplankton biomass at the whole-lake scale was also
observed by Lehman (1988) in Lake Michigan and by
Strecker and Arnott (2008) in a subset of our lakes. In
experimental mesocosms, increases in chlorophyll (phytoplankton
biomass) in the presence of Bythotrephes,
consistent with trophic cascades, were observed (Strecker
and Arnott 2005). Conversely, Wahlstro¨m and Westman
(1999) observed no significant effect of Bythotrephes on
chlorophyll in enclosures. Thus, it is still uncertain as to
whether Bythotrephes leads to increases in phytoplankton
that are characteristic of traditional trophic cascades,
especially with aggregate measures of the phytoplankton
community (i.e., biovolume). Such trophic effects may be
precluded in our region at the whole-lake scale because
the low nutrient status of the lakes may be the more
dominant structuring feature for phytoplankton, as McQueen
et al. (1986) has suggested should be the case for
oligotrophic systems. Additionally, trophic cascades can be
dampened by compensatory dynamics in food webs (Pace
et al. 1999).
Although we failed to see differences in phytoplankton
biomass attributable to a trophic cascade in invaded lakes,
we did observe shifts in the taxonomic composition of the
phytoplankton that have not been previously reported. In
invaded lakes, we found that pyrrhophyte and cyanophyte
biovolumes were greater relative to noninvaded lakes. We
hypothesize that increases in pyrrhophytes and cyanophytes
are related to reduced grazing pressure from a less
abundant cladoceran community in invaded lakes. Pyrrhophytes
are generally larger, highly motile cells, which
may be more difficult for smaller zooplankton to handle
and consume. The greater biovolume of cyanophytes in
invaded lakes was the result of increases in less edible
filamentous taxa (t-test, t 5 2.51, df 5 20, p 5 0.02;
Fig. 3a). The shift in the zooplankton of invaded lakes to a
more copepod-dominated community may be responsible
for the increases in filamentous taxa, because copepods are
generally less effective grazers.
The other important shift with Bythotrephes invasion was
a loss of chrysophyte biovolume. Losses occurred as a result
of both motile colonial and nonmotile unicellular functional
groups in invaded lakes (B. Beisner unpubl.). This is a
counterintuitive result; we would have expected, as was the
case for pyrrhophytes and cyanophytes, to see chrysophytes
increase in Bythotrephes lakes as a result of reduced grazing
pressure from crustacean zooplankton. These results also
appear to conflict with a recent study of long-term changes
in phytoplankton biovolume in Harp Lake, an invaded lake
included in our study. Over a 25-yr period, Paterson et al.
(2008) noted significant increases in chrysophyte biovolume,
speculating that the recent invasion by Bythotrephes may
have contributed to alterations in food webs that indirectly
altered phytoplankton composition and biovolume. Large,
colonial chrysophytes are less favorable to size-selective
herbivores such as the rotifer Conochilus, which peaked in
Harp Lake following invasion (Hovius et al. 2007). In part,
the apparent discrepancy between the spatial and temporal
studies may be explained by differences in study design. A
more detailed examination of seasonal phytoplankton
biovolume in Harp Lake in 2005 showed that only a quarter
of the total ice-free phytoplankton biovolume (, 27%)
occurs during July and August, the months of focus in our
study (A. Paterson unpubl.). When the entire ice-free season
is considered, chrysophyte and diatom species dominate the
phytoplankton assemblage, but these groups are generally
less important during the summer months. Thus, the
assemblage-wide changes reported by Paterson et al. (2008)
following invasion may not have been detectable with our
shortened sampling season. Furthermore, the loss of
chrysophytes from the epilimnion in our spatial survey
may have been balanced by an increase in the abundance of
metalimnetic colonial chrysophytes in the lakes. However,
our study examined epilimnetic phytoplankton communities
only, and so we cannot confirm or refute this hypothesis.
In some instances, our ability to attribute variability in
communities to measured factors was low. This likely
reflects a combination of measurement and process error.
As mentioned already, our sampling protocol focused on
the epilimnion of lakes, potentially missing changes in
metalimnetic algal biovolume, which dominates in midsummer.
However, the effects of Bythotrephes on zooplankton
have been primarily observed in the epilimnion
(Strecker and Arnott 2008), and thus we would expect to
see the greatest effects on phytoplankton in the epilimnion
as well. Additionally, we combined samples from several
sampling dates into single composite samples, which may
have reduced our ability to detect subtle temporal
dynamics. For example, we observed low explanatory
power of cladoceran biomass on edible phytoplankton
biovolume in all of our study lakes. However, other surveys
(Pe´rez-Fuentetaja et al. 2000) and experiments (Strecker
and Arnott 2008) in the region with better temporal
resolution (i.e., comparison of samples taken at the same
time period) have also observed weak relationships between
zooplankton and phytoplankton, suggesting that this is a
more widespread phenomenon and is not related to our
study protocols. Finally, variation explained by Bythotrephes
was generally small: This may be the result of
several factors, including the inherent temporal variability
in abundance of the invader (Strecker et al. 2006), as well as
the recent invasion of several of our study lakes (first
detected the year that we sampled in five lakes). There is
evidence that the structure of lake food webs may modify
the effects of Bythotrephes (Young and Yan 2008), as well
as invader density (Hovius et al. 2006) and time lag (Yan
and Pawson 1997) effects. These factors may all preclude a
single explanation for large components of variation in
communities with the variables used here.
Predatory invasive species may have stronger top-down
influences than native predators, especially early in the
invasion process. There is evidence that prey naivete´ may
be particularly prevalent in freshwater systems (Cox and
Lima 2006), which may allow for stronger immediate
trophic effects and, therefore, greater potential for trophic
cascades. Our study was conducted on a landscape of lakes
in which invasion by Bythotrephes is still actively under
way, and many of our invaded lakes represent relatively
recent invasions, and therefore have strong potential for
top-down effects. Over time, as prey communities are
shaped by Bythotrephes predation and as prey develop new
predator-evasion strategies, we expect the observable
changes to food webs to lessen (Pangle et al. 2007). Despite
this, time since invasion was not a significant factor in our
analyses, suggesting that prey communities have not yet
developed effective responses to invasion.
Although the results of our cross-lake comparison may
be somewhat restricted to one region, it is a landscape
typical of the lake-dominated Boreal Shield biome. Lakes
cover 10% of the boreal forest globally, occupying roughly
1.3 3 106 km2 (Molot and Dillon 1996), and . 700,000 of
these lakes are found in eastern temperate Canada (Minns
et al. 1990). Bythotrephes continues to spread to a large
number of lakes (Ontario Federation of Anglers and
Hunters 2010) in the susceptible low-productivity boreal
ecozone (Vander Zanden et al. 2003), as well as temperate
ecozones in northeastern United States (Johnson et al.
2008), suggesting that greater understanding of the
complex interactions between invaders and ecosystem
processes is necessary.
Our study indicates that invasion can alter the fundamental
processes in the pelagic zone of freshwater lakes,
altering interactions between zooplankton and phytoplankton
trophic levels and between environmental drivers and
the phytoplankton community. The complexity of intertrophic
and trophic–environmental interactions suggests
that simple, general relationships cannot describe or predict
invader effects at the ecosystem level. Rather, our ability to
predict future change and manage these vital ecosystems
will depend on understanding effects within the environmental
and invasion history context.