xabstract The predacious invertebrate Bythotrephes longimanus has now invaded >90 freshwater lakes in North America.
There is some evidence that B. longimanus has a negative effect on summer zooplankton species richness; however,
no study has examined the effect of B. longimanus throughout the ice-free season in more than one lake. We
visited 10 invaded and 4 reference lakes every 2 weeks from May to September, collecting B. longimanus, crustacean
zooplankton, and water chemistry samples. Composite samples were pooled across the study season for each lake.
Bythotrephes longimanus significantly reduced cladoceran species richness, diversity, and abundance, and the total zooplankton
community also exhibited decreased richness, diversity, and abundance. Seasonal sampling was better than
synoptic surveys at detecting changes in abundance, but richness estimates were similar. As B. longimanus continues to
spread across lake landscapes, we expect it will have profound impacts on local and regional richness and species distribution
patterns.
xintroduction Bythotrephes longimanus Leydig (Crustacea, Onychopoda)
is a predatory zooplankton species that has invaded numerous
lakes in North America. First detected in Lake Ontario
in 1982 (Mills et al. 2003), B. longimanus has spread to all
of the Laurentian Great Lakes and >90 inland lakes in Ontario
(C. Gamble, Ontario Federation of Anglers and
Hunters, 4601 Guthrie Dr., Peterborough, ON K9J 8L5,
Canada, unpublished data), Minnesota (M. Brown, Department
of Biology, University of Minnesota–Duluth, Duluth,
MN 55812, USA, unpublished data), and Michigan
(Jarnagin et al. 2000) and reservoirs in Ohio (Ferry and
Wright 2002). Bythotrephes longimanus occupies lakes that
span a gradient of temperature, salinity, pH, and depth
within its native range in Eurasia (Grigorovich et al. 1998).
Humans are an important dispersal vector for B. longimanus,
and with its broad tolerance of environmental conditions, it
appears to have the potential to invade a large number of
lakes in North America (MacIsaac et al. 2000, 2004).
Our understanding of the impacts of B. longimanus on inland
aquatic communities in North America is incomplete.
Invasion events are unpredictable, thus little empirical data
documenting the effects of invasion on recipient communities
exists. However, a single case study of long-term biweekly
records of both pre- and post-invasion planktonic
communities from Harp Lake, Ontario, has revealed evidence
of negative effects of B. longimanus on crustacean 
zooplankton species richness and cladoceran zooplankton
abundance since its invasion in 1993 (Yan et al. 2001,
2002).
Although trends seen in Harp Lake suggest that the invasion
of B. longimanus will have important consequences for
zooplankton communities, effects of predation can be sitespecific
(Posey and Hines 1991). Broader spatial surveys are
necessary to determine how universal the impacts of
B. longimanus are in temperate lakes. A study comparing 17
invaded boreal shield lakes to 13 uninvaded reference lakes
provided strong evidence that the patterns of invasion observed
in Harp Lake were also expressed in other lakes of
differing water chemistry, morphometry, and species assemblages
(Boudreau and Yan 2003). However, sampling for
this study was limited to a single midsummer vertical zooplankton
haul, which can underestimate the annual species
pool by 50% (Arnott et al. 1998). As well, B. longimanus
abundances generally peak in midsummer in boreal lakes
(J. Young and E. Parrott, Department of Biology, York University,
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada, unpublished data);
however, they tend to be absent from the pelagic zone in the
early and latter months of the ice-free season. If some zooplankton
species are able to take advantage of vernal and autumnal
temporal refuges that exist when B. longimanus are
rare or absent from the water column, then Boudreau and
Yan (2003) may have overestimated the effect of
B. longimanus on annual zooplankton species pools. For example,
some copepods may change the timing of reproduction
in order to reduce overlap with predators that peak later
in the summer (Hairston, Jr., and Walton 1986), and Daphnia
clones have exhibited earlier age at maturation in the
presence of fish kairomones (Sakwiska 2002).
The primary objective of this study was to examine the
effects of B. longimanus on ice-free season averages of
species richness, diversity, evenness, and abundance of
crustacean zooplankton in boreal shield lakes. We expected
that B. longimanus would cause declines in all these indices
of community structure. However, because of the inclusion
of time periods when B. longimanus was absent from
the water column, there may be temporal refuges available
for some species, during which time they might prosper.
We used the persistence of B. longimanus in the water column
of our study lakes as a way to assess the availability of
a temporal refuge for zooplankton. Therefore, high persistence
would suggest that there is a short time available for
zooplankton to avoid B. longimanus and we would expect
to see greater negative effects compared with times of low
persistence of the invader, when zooplankton would have
an opportunity to survive in the absence of predation by
this invertebrate. Hence, our seasonal purview might actually
detect reduced effects in comparison with those observed
during peak B. longimanus abundance (Boudreau
and Yan 2003; Barbiero and Tuchman 2004), or indeed no
effects at all.
A secondary objective of this study was to assess the relationship
between species richness and several environmental
factors that are typically related to the number of crustacean
zooplankton species in a lake. In general, species richness is
positively related to lake area (Dodson 1992) and has a
hump-shaped relationship with lake productivity (Dodson et
al. 2000). In addition, invertebrate predators have been
shown to be important in structuring zooplankton communities.
In a survey of 60 lakes on the Precambrian Shield,
Keller and Conlon (1994) found that a number of zooplankton
species common to the region, such as Daphnia galeata
mendotae and Diaphanosoma birgei, were completely absent
from fishless lakes containing the phantom midge larvae,
Chaoborus americanus, a factor attributed to
invertebrate predation. Although our lakes were not chosen
to span large gradients of area or productivity, we believe
that B. longimanus may alter these conventional relationships
and will be an important driver of ecosystem change



xmethods
Twenty lakes in the districts of Muskoka, Haliburton, and
Parry Sound in southcentral Ontario, Canada, were chosen
for the survey. The lakes are oligo- to meso-trophic and
circumneutral in pH, as is typical of many boreal shield
lakes (Table 1). All of the study lakes have forested catchments
(mixed deciduous and coniferous) and small littoral
zones and are used primarily for recreation. Cisco
(Coregonus artedi), rainbow smelt (Osmerus mordax), lake
whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis), and yellow perch
(Perca flavescens) are the primary planktivorous fish in
these lakes (Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources: S.
Scholten and E. McIntyre, District of Parry Sound, Parry
Sound, ON P2A 1S4, Canada, and S. Sandstrom, District of
Muskoka, Bracebridge, ON P1L 1W9, Canada, unpublished
data). All the study lakes were chosen to have a similar glacial
history, and therefore, there were equal probabilities of
including zooplankton species dispersed by glacial retreat.
Although our intention was to have equal numbers of invaded
and reference lakes, B. longimanus was detected in
six of our planned reference lakes, reducing their number to
four. Hence, we reported results from 14 study lakes, 10 invaded
and 4 reference.
Crustacean zooplankton were sampled every 2 weeks
from May to September 2003 (n = 9) at a deep hole in each
lake, located each time using GPS (global positioning system).
Sample volume varied slightly among dates because of
small differences in station depth (Table 1). A single zooplankton
sample was taken by pulling a conical net (mesh
size 110 μm, 0.5 m diameter) through the water column,
starting 5 m off the lake bottom. Samples were preserved in
5.5% sugared and buffered formalin, and following preservation,
a seasonal composite sample was obtained by combining
equal proportions from each of the nine biweekly
zooplankton samples. Rotifers were sampled from the
epilimnion in a concurrent study with an integrated tube
sampler (2.5 cm inner diameter) (Hovius et al. 2006). On
each sampling date, B. longimanus was sampled at five stations
in each lake, including the deep hole, with a conical
net (mesh size 400 μm, 0.5 m diameter). The stations were
<1 km apart. A single haul was taken at each station from
5 m off the lake bottom to the water surface. Mean ice-free
B. longimanus abundance in the 10 invaded lakes was estimated
by averaging B. longimanus abundance in the five
replicate hauls in each lake over eight sampling dates from
June to September 2003. Only eight dates were used, as
B. longimanus samples were not taken in May. The number
of sampling dates when B. longimanus was present and its
persistence in invaded lakes are described (Table 2). Persistence
was defined as the number of consecutive sampling
dates that B. longimanus abundance in the lake was
>5 individuals·m–3. It has been suggested that there may be
an effect threshold of B. longimanus at abundances of 3–
5 individuals·m–3, especially with regards to their main prey,
cladocerans (Boudreau and Yan 2003). The higher threshold
value (5 individuals·m–3) was chosen, as it is a more conservative 
estimation of B. longimanus effects on the zooplankton
community.
Zooplankton were enumerated using a protocol designed
to ensure reasonable representation of rare species (Girard
and Reid 1990). Subsamples were generated with a Folsom
plankton splitter, and a mean of 336 individuals (standard
deviation = 109) was enumerated. The remainder of the sample
was scanned for rare species. Juvenile copepods were excluded
from all analyses, except total abundance.
Zooplankton were identified and counted on a Leica MZ
12.5 dissecting microscope. Because of uncertainty in identification,
Bosmina (Bosmina) freyi and Bosmina (Bosmina)
liederi (Taylor et al. 2002) were pooled, as were Chydorus
sphaericus and C. brevilabris (Frey 1980). Species presence
or absence and taxonomic revisions are listed in Table S1.2
Water chemistry samples were taken the week of 14 July
2003. An integrated tube sampler (2.5 cm inner diameter) was
used to collect water from the epilimnion, which was filtered
through 80 μm mesh to remove large particles, especially zooplankton.
Calcium, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), conductivity,
pH, and total phosphorus (TP) were analyzed following
Ontario Ministry of the Environment (1983) protocols (Table
1). Chlorophyll a (chl a) samples were collected every
2 weeks by concentrating a known volume of epilimnetic water
onto a 0.7 μm glass fibre filter, extracting for 24 h in
methanol, and analyzing with a fluorometer (Table 2) (TD
700; Turner Designs, Sunnyvale, California) (Welschmeyer
1994).
We used two methods to assess the adequacy of our zooplankton
richness estimates. First, we compared observed
species richness, the number of species found in the composite
sample, with Chao’s index (SChao1), a nonparametric
measure recommended for estimating species richness, because
it does not require knowledge of the species abundance
distribution (Magurran 2004). SChao1 was calculated by
where Sobs is the number of species observed in the sample,
F1 is the number of species in the sample that are represented
by a single individual, and F2 is the number of species
that are represented by two individuals (Chao 1984).
This estimator will exceed observed species richness as the
relative frequency of singletons increases, providing an estimate
of total richness based on the chance that some rare
species might be missed (Magurran 2004). The second approach
to assessing our richness estimates was to determine
if our counting effort was sufficient to sample all species
present by examining the relationship between number of individuals
counted and richness. The difference in species
richness using Chao’s index was negligible (t = –0.05, p =
0.96), as was the relationship between number of individuals
counted and richness (r2 = 0.10, p = 0.29), suggesting that
our observed richness is probably representative of the number
of crustacean zooplankton species in the pelagic region
of the lakes. Bythotrephes longimanus was not included in
richness estimates.
Species diversity and evenness were assessed using the
Shannon–Wiener diversity index and Smith and Wilson’s
(1996) evenness index, Evar, respectively. The values of Evar fall
between 0 (minimum evenness) and 1 (maximum evenness),
where ni is the number of individuals of species i, nj is the
number of individuals of species j, and S is the total number
of species. Evar is recommended as the best evenness measure
for general use (Smith and Wilson 1996).
Multivariate ordination techniques were used to evaluate
species abundances in relation to environmental variables
and the presence of B. longimanus. A preliminary examination
using correspondence analysis suggested that linear ordination
analysis was appropriate, thus redundancy analysis
(RDA) was performed using Canoco 4.5 (ter Braak and
Šmilauer 2002). Bythotrephes longimanus was entered as a
categorical variable to maximize differences between the
levels of the treatments. Environmental variables were assessed
for collinearity if the variance inflation factor was
>10 (Quinn and Keough 2002). All of the significant predictors
were independent. All species represented by adults
were included in the analysis, and abundances were logtransformed
to reduce the influence of dominant species.
Forward selection identified the variables that explained the
most variance in species data, which were then tested for
significance using a Monte Carlo permutation test (499 permutations).
Multiple regression analyses were performed to determine
what proportion of the variation in species richness data
could be explained by B. longimanus abundance and persistence,
presence or absence of dominant planktivorous fish
species, and environmental variables (i.e., TP, pH, maximum
depth, and lake area), using the best subsets procedure
(StatSoft Inc. 2001). Planktivorous fish data were provided
from sampling by the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources,
but because of uncertainty in quantifying fish abundance,
the major planktivores were placed in categories of
abundance (Table 2). For the multiple regression analysis,
abundances were converted to categorical numerical values
(absent = 0, absent but detected in the past = 0, very low =
1, low = 2, medium = 3, high = 4) and averaged for each
lake to create an index of fish density. Yellow perch could
only be classed as present or absent, and as they were present
in all lakes, they were excluded from analyses. Collinearity of
environmental predictor variables was detected if the variance
inflation factor of any predictors was >10 (Quinn and Keough
2002). Chl a was removed from the analysis because of
collinearity with TP. Assumptions of normality, heterogeneity
of variance, and independence were also assessed. The best
models were chosen by using several criteria: adjusted r2,
Mallow’s Cp, and Akaike’s information criterion (AIC)
(Quinn and Keough 2002). When evaluating the models,
smaller values of Mallow’s Cp and AIC indicate the best fit.

xresults
Physical and chemical characteristics did not differ between
invaded and uninvaded lakes, with the exception of total
phosphorus and chl a, which were, on average,
3.33 μgL–1 and 0.94 μgL–1 greater in the uninvaded lakes,
respectively (TP, t = –2.45, p = 0.03; chl a, t = –4.83, p <
0.01) (Tables 1, 2). There were no significant differences between
invaded and uninvaded lake calcium (log(x + 1)-
transformed), DOC, conductivity, and pH (Table 1). There
was also no difference in general lake morphometry, as
both maximum depth (Zmax) and surface area (log(x + 1)-
transformed) were similar between lake categories (Table 1).
In comparisons of invaded and noninvaded lakes, we
found that there was a large reduction in observed species
richness of zooplankton taxa in invaded lakes, from an average
of 15.0 in uninvaded lakes down to 11.6 species in invaded
lakes (t = –2.12, p = 0.06) (Fig. 1). This decline was
largely due to changes in cladoceran zooplankton, which
decreased on average by four species in invaded lakes (t =
–3.28, p < 0.01) (Fig. 1). Copepod richness was similar in
invaded and reference lakes (t = 0.76, p = 0.46) (Fig. 1).
There was no difference in Shannon–Wiener diversity in total
zooplankton (t = –1.31, p = 0.22) and copepods (t =
–0.40, p = 0.70) in invaded lakes compared with uninvaded
lakes, but there was a significant reduction in the diversity of
cladoceran zooplankton (t = –2.17, p = 0.05) (Fig. 1). Evenness
of the total zooplankton community (t = 0.40, p = 0.70)
was unaffected by B. longimanus invasion, whereas
cladocerans experienced a slight increase with invasion (t =
1.89, p = 0.08), and copepods showed a slight decrease in
the B. longimanus lakes (t = –1.89, p = 0.08) (Fig. 1). Invasion
had a negative effect on overall zooplankton (t = –1.91,
p = 0.08) and copepod abundance (t = –1.91, p = 0.08), resulting
in a twofold difference for both groups. In addition,
there was a decline in cladoceran abundance in invaded
lakes (t = –2.86, p = 0.01), where an almost fourfold difference
was observed (Fig. 1).
The relationship between B. longimanus abundance and
zooplankton species richness and abundance was inconsistent
across the invaded study lakes (Fig. 2). The deviations
in species richness and abundance from the reference lake
condition generally increased with higher abundance of
B. longimanus, but some invaded lakes actually had greater
richness and abundance than uninvaded lakes. When we explicitly
considered changes in zooplankton communities relative
to the abundance of B. longimanus in the lakes using
linear regression, we found that crustacean zooplankton species
richness (r2 = 0.04, p = 0.52), diversity (r2 < 0.01, p =
0.93), and abundance (r2 = 0.06, p = 0.42) were not related
to the mean abundance of B. longimanus. Likewise,
cladoceran species richness (r2 = 0.13, p = 0.20), diversity
(r2 = 0.11, p = 0.26), and abundance (r2 = 0.15, p = 0.14)
were not related to mean B. longimanus abundance.
RDA captured a significant amount of variance (p < 0.01)
in zooplankton species abundances, with B. longimanus
presence or absence explaining 43% of total species variation,
and Zmax (22%), chl a (20%), and TP (15%) contributing
to the remainder of species abundance variation (Fig. 3).
The first axis (λ1 = 0.22, p = 0.03) contrasts the presence
with the absence of B. longimanus, as most of the invaded
lakes fall on the same side as the B. longimanus vector, and
all of the reference lakes are on the opposite side of the gradient.
A number of species were negatively associated with
the invader (e.g., D. birgei, Mesocyclops edax, Holopedium
gibberum), and only one species, the glacial relict Senecella
calanoides, was positively correlated with B. longimanus
presence. The second axis (λ2 = 0.10) seems to be related to
lake productivity, as some cladoceran taxa (Bosmina
(Bosmina) spp., Daphnia retrocurva, and D. birgei) and omnivorous
cyclopoids (M. edax and Orthocyclops modestus)
were positively associated with the TP and chl a vectors.
The majority of zooplankton taxa were, on average, in
lower abundance in invaded lakes than in reference lakes
(Fig. 4). The cladoceran taxa tended to fall further below the
1:1 line than did the copepods, especially smaller-bodied
taxa such as Chydorus spp. and Eubosmina coregoni. A few
larger taxa, such as S. calanoides, Cyclops scutifer, and
Daphnia dubia, were more abundant in invaded lakes than
reference lakes, on average, but for the most part, both largeand
small-bodied zooplankton were less abundant in
B. longimanus invaded lakes.
Species richness tended to increase with longer persistence
times of B. longimanus populations throughout the
summer (r2 = 0.31, p = 0.09), suggesting that there is no
temporal refuge available to zooplankton. Using multiple regression
analysis, we found that all of the most parsimonious
models to explain species richness had negative
associations of species richness with mean B. longimanus
abundance, but that zooplankton richness was positively re-
lated to B. longimanus persistence in high abundances in the
lake (Table 3). In both models, species richness was positively
related to duration of B. longimanus persistence and
TP and negatively related to mean B. longimanus
abundance. In addition, the best model selected by AIC had
positive associations of zooplankton richness with area and
pH. The presence of fish planktivore species had no effect
on zooplankton species richness.

xdiscussion
Our study has demonstrated that B. longimanus can have
negative effects on zooplankton communities through parts
of the ice-free season, reducing species richness, diversity,
and abundance throughout the ice-free season. This negative
effect was exacerbated in the cladocerans, which showed
significant declines in richness (on average, four less species
in invaded lakes), abundance (a fourfold decline), and diversity.
These results are in agreement with the declines in zooplankton
richness observed in Harp Lake (Yan et al. 2002),
Muskoka lakes (Boudreau and Yan 2003), and Lakes Michigan,
Erie, and Huron (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004)
(Table 4). Reductions in the abundance of zooplankton have
been shown experimentally (Strecker and Arnott 2005) and
in Harp Lake (Yan et al. 2001); however, some recent studies
have failed to detect changes in total zooplankton community
abundance (Boudreau and Yan 2003; Barbiero and
Tuchman 2004) (Table 4). The samples in Boudreau and
Yan’s (2003) study were taken on a single sampling date,
and this snapshot approach does not take into account seasonal
dynamics, as was done in our study and Yan et al.
(2001). Barbiero and Tuchman’s (2004) samples were only
taken for 1 month starting 1 August and, thus, do not reflect
zooplankton abundance in late spring, early summer, and
fall. A comparison of our study with others over a shorter
period of time suggests that short-term synoptic surveys may
adequately document changes in some measures of zooplankton
community structure associated with B. longimanus invasion.
For example, the effect of B. longimanus on species
richness seems to be consistent between different sampling
routines, but longer studies, especially in smaller inland lakes,
that encompass the entire season seem to capture changes in
total abundance better than single sampling dates (Table 4).
Several zooplankton taxa showed steep declines in
B. longimanus invaded lakes. As past studies have documented
the general negative effect that B. longimanus has on
many cladoceran taxa (Boudreau and Yan 2003), we expected
to observe this in our study as well. As expected, the
abundances of a number of common cladoceran species,
such as Bosmina (Bosmina) spp., and D. birgei, were severely
reduced: on average, a decrease of greater than four
times in invaded lakes. The larger species Daphnia
longiremis, Daphnia mendotae, and H. gibberum also had
lower abundances in invaded lakes, suggesting that body size
alone does not provide refuge from predation. As well, it appears
as though some hypolimnetic species, such as
D. longiremis (Keller and Conlon 1994), do not escape predation.
These patterns are generally in agreement with Boudreau
and Yan (2003), Yan et al. (2001), and Barbiero and
Tuchman (2004), although there seem to be some systemspecific
differences. For example, D. mendotae has remained
unaffected by B. longimanus in Harp Lake (Yan et al. 2001;
Boudreau and Yan 2003; this study) but has declined in
other lakes (Barbiero and Tuchman 2004). Unexpectedly,
several common copepod taxa (Leptodiaptomus minutus,
Diacyclops bicuspidatus thomasi, and M. edax) in our study
were also negatively affected by B. longimanus. Previously,
only M. edax was thought to be affected by invasion
(Boudreau and Yan 2003; Barbiero and Tuchman 2004).
Given that copepods are in high abundance in the late spring
in these lakes, before B. longimanus emerges from resting
eggs and rapidly builds up populations through parthenogenic
reproduction (A. Strecker, unpublished data), it is especially
surprising that they declined, as their earlier
dominance in lakes would suggest that they should be able
to use a temporal refuge from B. longimanus predation.
However, longer-lived slow-reproducing copepods may actually
be more susceptible to predation by B. longimanus because
they are unable to reproduce as quickly as
cladocerans. Thus, the copepods are less able to respond to
low predator abundances, as B. longimanus is known to have
extremely patchy spatial and temporal dynamics (J. Young
and E. Parrott, Department of Biology, York University, Toronto,
ON M3J 1P3, Canada, unpublished data) and, therefore,
cannot take advantage of this window of opportunity.
This further supports the notion that to adequately assess
changes in total and individual zooplankton abundances resulting
from B. longimanus invasion, longer-term surveys
are necessary.
Our study suggests that most species are not able to take
advantage of a temporal refuge from B. longimanus predation.
We found that longer persistence times of B. longimanus
resulted in higher species richness, the opposite of what we
would expect to see if a temporal refuge was indeed available.
Bythotrephes longimanus was detected in invaded lakes
on an average of seven sampling dates, or about 14 weeks
during the summer. This is likely a conservative estimate, as
B. longimanus was present in 90% of invaded lakes on the
final sampling date in September and has shown the ability
to persist into late fall in some lakes (J. Young, Department
of Biology, York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada,
personal communication). Thus, in most lakes, the only op-
portunity for a temporal refuge is in the spring, and our evidence
suggests that this window of opportunity is not being
used by zooplankton, perhaps because water temperatures
are cool and food availability is low in these oligomesotrophic
lakes. If zooplankton were indeed using this
temporal refuge, we would expect to see no effect of
B. longimanus on zooplankton richness and abundance, especially
on copepods, which are typically in high numbers in
these lakes in late spring, thus having reduced temporal
overlap with the invader. However, this was not the case:
overall zooplankton abundance and richness were reduced,
and several copepod taxa were also negatively affected by
B. longimanus. Another potential explanation is that there
are competitive interactions occurring between B. longimanus
and its predators. Mysis relicta and other zooplanktivores
may benefit from longer B. longimanus persistence times by
switching from smaller zooplankton to the larger invader,
thus freeing the zooplankton from intense predation. Gut
content analysis of M. relicta collected from several of our
study lakes has revealed the presence of B. longimanus body
parts, thus it seems that the invader can also be a prey item
for other invertebrate predators (Nordin 2005).
There was a substantial amount of among-lake variation
in the responses of the zooplankton communities to
B. longimanus invasion. This variability appears to be unrelated
to the actual abundance of B. longimanus, which was
not a strong predictor of zooplankton richness or abundance
in invaded lakes. There is some evidence that zooplankton
can adapt their morphologies in the presence of B. longimanus
(Bungartz and Branstrator 2003), suggesting that the
abundance of the invader may play a role in eliciting behavioural
and morphological responses in the zooplankton community
and thus increasing species survival. Two of the
invaded lakes, Peninsula and Vernon, had zooplankton communities
that more closely resembled communities in noninvaded
reference lakes. Both lakes had relatively high mean
B. longimanus abundance (7.8 and 4.3 individuals·m–3, respectively)
and had richness values that fell more into the
range of uninvaded lakes. When these lakes were excluded
from regression analyses, mean B. longimanus abundance
had a significant negative effect on species richness (r2 =
0.53, p < 0.01). The redundancy analysis also suggests that
Peninsula and Vernon lakes have species compositions that
are more similar to those of reference lakes than invaded
lakes. We are unsure why the zooplankton community composition
of these two lakes is seemingly unaffected by invasion.
One possibility is that B. longimanus is feeding in a
density-dependent manner, reducing the abundances of certain
preferred species to low densities, and then switching to
higher-density prey items that can be caught more easily.
Thus, B. longimanus is not reducing any species to the point
where it can no longer be detected. Consistent with this hypothesis,
the evenness of Peninsula and Vernon lakes was
higher than the average of the invaded lakes, and the diversity
was greater than the average diversity of the uninvaded
lakes. The abundances of the zooplankton communities of
both of these lakes are below the average of other invaded
lakes, so although it seems that B. longimanus is reducing
zooplankton abundance, species richness remains unaffected.
However, if B. longimanus feeding is indeed densitydependent
in these lakes, then why is this not occurring in
all of the invaded lakes? It is possible that zooplankton reproduction
in these lakes was high enough to fend off the
loss of species richness. Yan et al. (1991) showed that for
the rotifer Keratella taurocephala, high rates of production
could be maintained, even under intense predation by species
of the invertebrate Chaoborus. Vernon Lake had high
secondary production relative to B. longimanus consumption
(A. Strecker, unpublished data), so this may, in part, explain
the lack of effect on species richness.
Other potential explanations for the high levels of species
richness observed in Peninsula and Vernon lakes are that
they had different morphological, biotic, and chemical conditions
than the rest of the invaded lakes, and thus, there existed
some advantage that allowed coexistence. For instance,
a deep-water spatial refuge in the lake can afford some species
a certain amount of protection from predation. However,
Peninsula and Vernon lakes were the two shallowest invaded
lakes, suggesting that they, in fact, had a smaller spatial refuge
than other invaded lakes. Another possibility is that Peninsula
and Vernon lakes were less clear than other invaded
lakes, thus offering zooplankton a dark-water refuge. This
may be the case for Vernon Lake, which had higher DOC
and lower Secchi disc values than did other invaded lakes,
but not for Peninsula Lake, which had values that were
within the range of the other invaded lakes. Thus, this variability
that we observed between study lakes in response to
an invasion of B. longimanus may be due to a combination
of factors related to characteristics of the invader, i.e., feeding
strategy, and to characteristics of the lakes, such as productivity
and lake clarity.
The importance of lake area and productivity in determining
crustacean zooplankton species richness in temperate
freshwater lakes has been well established (Dodson 1992;
Dodson et al. 2000). Surface area had little predictive power
in our analysis of factors influencing species richness in
lakes invaded by B. longimanus, but other variables related
to the invader were much better predictors of zooplankton
richness. Although we did not measure primary productivity,
TP can be used as a surrogate for productivity (see Leibold
1999). A caveat of our study is that uninvaded lakes had
slightly higher levels of TP and chl a than did the invaded
lakes, but in our oligo-mesotrophic systems, these differences
are small and are unlikely to lead to the observed differences
in species richness. In addition, our multiple
regression analyses suggest that although TP is an important
predictor, B. longimanus explains far more variation in species
richness. Although B. longimanus abundance by itself
was a poor predictor of species richness, when combined
with persistence of the invader in multiple regression analysis,
the explanatory power of the two variables was much
greater. It is possible that the result from the linear regression
was being influenced by the two outlier values, Vernon
and Peninsula lakes, while these values became less important
with more predictive variables. In fact, neither of these
values had an exceptionally large influence on the final multiple
regression models, as measured by Cook’s distance statistic
(Quinn and Keough 2002).
The composition of the fish community can also have substantial
effects on the structure of the zooplankton community
(Brooks and Dodson 1965). Although there appear to be
some differences in the abundance of planktivores present in
invaded versus reference lakes, our data suggest that
B. longimanus is still having a substantial negative effect. If
fish were in fact responsible for the effects that we observed,
then we would expect larger zooplankton species to be more
negatively affected than small taxa. However, reductions in
species richness were proportionately greater for small species
(28%) than for large-bodied zooplankton (14%), which
supports our assertion that B. longimanus is largely responsible
for the observed reduction in zooplankton species richness.
Other variables, such as pH (Keller and Pitblado 1984),
calcium (Schell et al. 2001; Wærvågen et al. 2002), and
postglacial history of the lake (Dadswell 1974; Carter et al.
1980), can be important predictors of zooplankton richness.
However, neither pH nor calcium were significantly different
in B. longimanus lakes compared with reference lakes,
and all of our study lakes have a similar postglacial history
because of the presence of M. relicta. Thus, these factors did
not influence our results.
There is now a significant body of evidence to suggest
that B. longimanus invasions cause changes to the zooplankton
communities of freshwater lakes. This is especially true
of cladoceran taxa, which seem to take the brunt of B. longimanus
predation, as our study has exhibited striking declines
in their richness, abundance, and diversity in invaded lakes.
A concurrent study of the rotifer composition and abundance
of the same 14 lakes showed a positive relationship between
rotifer and B. longimanus abundance, perhaps as a result of
reduced competition with herbivorous cladocerans for phytoplankton
prey (Hovius et al. 2006). These results are somewhat
surprising, as B. longimanus is an invertebrate predator
that has several native functional analogues in these boreal
lakes, including M. relicta, Leptodora kindtii, Chaoborus
spp., and water mites (Arachnida, Hydrachnidia). It could be
argued that B. longimanus occupies a unique feeding niche;
however, this seems unlikely as its dietary overlap with other
invertebrate predators is high (McNaught et al. 2004; Young
and Riessen 2005). Bythotrephes longimanus employs several
effective strategies to maintain high feeding rates in
these boreal lakes: (i) although it is consumed by some fish
species, presumably the long tail spine of B. longimanus decreases
predation impact; (ii) it lacks large amplitude migrations
(Yan and Pawson 1997), unlike many other invertebrate
predators (Chaoborus, Mysis, Leptodora), so it is continuously
in regions of high prey density; (iii) it reproduces
parthenogenically, unlike mites, which are sexual and have
slower reproductive times, so it can quickly respond to increases
in food resources; and (iv) its neonates are larger, allowing
them to exploit a larger range of prey sizes, unlike
the small-bodied clutches of Leptodora (Branstrator 2005).
What is clear is that not all lakes respond to B. longimanus
invasion in the same way. Our study has highlighted that
there are substantial among-lake differences in the effect of
the invader on richness, abundance, and diversity of zooplankton
communities.
As B. longimanus continues to spread across the landscape
of North America, it seems likely that it will be an important
new factor in determining the zooplankton
composition of freshwater lakes. This is certain to have implications
for regional species richness, as our results suggest
that certain species, such as the ubiquitous taxa
D. birgei and M. edax, have reduced abundances in invaded
lakes across the landscape, leaving few populations that may
act as sources to disperse to new locales.