xabstract
We assessed the effects of the introduced
bivalve L. fortunei on the abundance and
biomass of associated benthic invertebrates in
South American large floodplain rivers. The survey
was based on comparisons of L. fortunei-covered
and L. fortunei-barren areas in five artificial cages
from where large predators were excluded, exposed
to colonization by the mussel for a total of 17
months in the lower Parana´ river delta. Accompanying
invertebrates were dominated by Oligochaeta,
Nematoda, Rotifera, Copepoda, Gastropoda,
Hirudinea, Chironomidae and nauplii. Also present
in minor numbers were Tardigrada, Turbellaria,
Cladocera, Ostracoda, Insecta, Hydracarina
and Decapoda. Dominant invertebrates were 27–
100% more numerous (and hosted 43–100% more
biomass) in areas with L. fortunei than in areas
barren of the mussel. In areas with L. fortunei, total
invertebrate biomass (excluding the bivalve) was
positively correlated with mussel biomass, and
increased with time of exposure under water. No
such trend was observed in areas barren of L.
fortunei. It is suggested that higher invertebrate
growth is associated with enhanced substrate
complexity and, probably, the transfer of organic
matter from the plankton to the sediments due to
the mussels’ feces and pseudofeces. Some of the
adverse ecosystem-wide effects of filter-feeding
invasive mussels observed in European and North
American water bodies may be offset in the Parana´
by the extremely high loads of organic matter in
these turbid waters.

xintroduction
Limnoperna fortunei (Dunker, 1857), the Asian
golden mussel, is an invasive freshwater species
that shares several salient features with the zebra
mussel, Dreissena polymorpha (Pallas, 1771),
arguably the most influential animal to ever
invade North American fresh waters (Thorp
et al., 1998). Both have filter-feeding habits, are
epifaunal and attach to hard substrates by means
of a byssus, have fast growth rates and rapid
dispersion by planktonic larvae (Boltovskoy &
Cataldo, 1999; Boltovskoy et al., 2006; Karatayev
et al., 2007, in press).
Approximately 35 years after the first record of
L. fortunei outside of its native area, in Hong
Kong (Morton, 1979), and ca. 15 after it invaded
South America (Pastorino et al., 1993), information
on the biology and impact of this invader is
slowly building up (see reviews in Darrigran,
2002; Boltovskoy et al., 2006). Although research
on L. fortunei is still in its infancy, investigations
carried out so far have provided valuable information
on the changes that are currently taking
place in South American water-bodies in connection
with this invasion. Trophic changes seem to
be of particular relevance, since the filtering
activity of these organisms leads to shifts in
sedimentation rates, nutrient cycling and seston
abundance and composition (Cataldo et al., 2005;
Sylvester et al., 2005). On the other hand, higher
trophic levels benefit from the additional resource
represented by both planktonic larvae and benthic
adults of the mussel (Montalto et al., 1999;
Ferriz et al., 2000; Penchaszadeh et al., 2000;
Garcı´a & Protogino, 2005; Boltovskoy et al.,
2006; Sylvester et al., in press ). Similar ecosystem
responses have been extensively reported in
association with the invasion of European and
North American fresh waters by D. polymorpha
(Phelps, 1994; Gardner et al., 1995; Karatayev
et al., 1997; Baker et al., 1998; Magoulick &
Lewis, 2002).
Among other effects, colonization by D. polymorpha
has been associated with modifications in
the composition and abundance of benthic assemblages
to such extent that it has often been
labeled an ‘‘ecosystem engineer’’ species (Karatayev
et al., 1997). Similarities between the zebra
and the golden mussel suggest that the latter may
also be involved in major reorganizations of the
benthic systems invaded, but so far direct evidences
of this effect have been lacking. Darrigran
et al. (1998) surveyed the fauna associated with
Limnoperna beds at Bagliardi, on the coast of the
Rı´o de la Plata estuary. However, this interesting
investigation was chiefly aimed at tracking
monthly changes in species richness and diversity
of the fauna recorded together with Limnoperna,
whereas comparisons with no-Limnoperna conditions
were limited to a single pre-invasion sample,
and absolute abundance and biomass were not
reported.
This work uses field experiments in order to
assess the influence of L. fortunei on benthic
invertebrates. Our main goal was tracing changes
in invertebrate numbers and biomass, which in turn
drive shifts in the fluxes of energy and matter and
rearrangements in the structure of trophic webs.


xmethods
Experimental PVC cages covered by a plastic
protective screen with 5 mm meshes (Fig. 1) were
deployed on 6 November 2002 in the lower Parana´
river delta, Argentina (3323¢55† S, 5835¢41† W).
Cages were suspended from a pier (ca. 1 m below
the surface, depending on tide and wind conditions,
0.5 m above the bottom), and moored to the
bottom by means of 20 kg weights. The experimental
site has a freshwater tidal regime of
approximately ±0.5 m, but wind-induced water
level variations can occasionally increase this
range to over 2 m for short periods.
Five cages were retrieved 153 (first retrieval) to
503 days (fifth retrieval) after deployment (see
Table 1), and the accumulated overgrowth thoroughly
removed with a sharp blade and preserved
with 3% formaldehyde buffered with calcium
carbonate. Extensive siltation was noticed in the
last cage retrieved (on 23 March 2004).
Colonization by L. fortunei of newly exposed
surfaces is typically uneven, starting at the corners
and extending from there to the center of the cage
walls (Fig. 2). Thus, associated invertebrates were
retrieved and stored separately from the area
covered by L. fortunei and from that barren of the
mollusc, and the corresponding surfaces were
assessed. Samples were washed on a 70 lm screen
in order to eliminate fine sediment and split into
two fractions: >250 lm and < 250 lm. Major
invertebrate groups were recognized in the samples,
counted, and their biomass was estimated
(see below). In the >250 lm fraction in most cases
the entire sample was processed (identifications
and measurements), whereas in the < 250 lm at
least 50 individuals of each major taxonomic
group, or at least half of the sample, were
processed. Large samples were split with the aid
of Folsom’s sample splitter (McEwen et al.,
1954). At least 100 specimens of L. fortunei
>1 mm and 100 < 1 mm were measured in each
sample.
Biomass of Turbellaria, Nematoda, Ostracoda,
Decapoda, and Hydracarina was assessed on the
basis of their biovolumes according to Feller &
Warwick (1988). Size-weight relationships were
employed for Copepoda (Dumont et al., 1975),
Gastropoda (Eckblad, 1971), Chironomidae larvae
(Mason, 1977), Ephemeroptera larvae (Johnston&
Cunjak, 1999), Cladocera, and nauplii (Bottrell,
1975). For Rotifera we measured 172 individuals in
two size-classes, and used simple geometric shapes
for volumetric estimates, whereas for Hirudinea
biovolumes were assessed by means of water
displacement in a graduated cylinder (Feller &
Warwick, 1988). For most groups wet to dry weight
conversions were based on a factor of 0.12 (Dumont
et al., 1975), exceptingNematoda (0.25), Hirudinea
(0.20) and Chironomidae (0.20) (cf. Feller & Warwick,
1988). For Oligochaeta we used our own
estimate (0.15; based on 2000 specimens collected
on two different retrieval dates). In all cases a
specific density of 1.13 g cm–3 was assumed (Feller
&Warwick, 1988).
Biomass of L. fortunei was assessed by means
of a size to tissue dry-weight regression, empirically
derived from 138 specimens 2 to 30 mm long
collected in the area of the survey. For mussels
<2 mm biovolume to biomass conversions were
employed.
The exposed surface of mussel beds was
estimated as the added surfaces of the intervening
shells minus 20% (to account for the fraction in
direct contact with the substrate or with other
mussels that is not available for invertebrate
colonization; Stewart et al., 2003). Shell surface
values were assessed on the basis of measurements
of 41 specimens 4 to 32 mm in size (for
smaller mussels simple geometric shapes were
used as a proxy), and a length-surface regression
was applied to the length frequency distribution
data available for each sample.
The effects of the presence/absence of L.
fortunei and time on the densities and biomass
of other invertebrates was analyzed with a twoway
ANOVA without replicates. Since musselcolonized
and mussel-barren areas sampled at any
one date are part of a single framework, temporal
differences are not actually independent from
spatial ones; thus, our discussions on seasonal
trends are restricted and largely provisional. Nonadditivity
of the first four sampling dates was
confirmed with Tukey’s test (for the last one the
sampling design was not balanced). One-tailed P
were calculated whenever results were in the
expected direction (i.e. more invertebrates with
than without L. fortunei); otherwise two-tailed
tests were used. Whenever parametric assumptions
could not be fulfilled, correlation and
regression analyses were performed with the aid
of Spearman’s non parametric techniques.

xresults
L. fortunei densities varied from around 45,000 to
290,000 ind. m–2 (157 to 387 g tissue dry weight
m–2), which is around the normal range reported
for South American invaded water bodies (Boltovskoy
& Cataldo, 1999; Darrigran & Damborenea,
2005; Fig. 3; Table 1).
In order of decreasing numerical importance,
accompanying invertebrates were represented by
Rotifera (dominated by Lecane bulla, with
smaller numbers of L. stenroosi, Collotheca sp.
and various unidentified species of Monogononta
and Bdelloidea), Oligochaeta (dominated by Nais
variabilis and N. communis; Dero sawayai, Slavina
evelinae, Pristina osborni, D. nivea, N. pardalis,
Slavina isochaeta and Pristina aequiseta were also
found), Nematoda, Copepoda (dominated by
Harpacticoida and some Cyclopoida including
Macrocyclops albidens albidens and Eucyclops
agilis), Chironomidae (dominated by Chironominae
and with a smaller contribution of Tanypodinae),
Tardigrada, copepod nauplii, Turbellaria,
Gastropoda (dominated by Heleobia piscium),
Hirudinea (Helobdella adiastola, H. hyalina and
Haementeria eicchorniae), Ostracoda (Podocopina
sp.), Cladocera, including benthic (Camptocercus
sp. and Alona sp.) and planktonic
(Bosmina hagmanni) species, other insects
(chiefly Ephemeroptera, Caenidae), Hydracarina,
and a single specimen of Tanaidacea (Crustacea)
(Table 1). However, not all groups were recorded
in adequate numbers for quantitative analyses.
Thus, Oligochaeta, Nematoda, Rotifera, Copepoda,
Gastropoda, Hirudinea, Chironomidae and
nauplii were present in most samples and usually
had large numbers of individuals. These eight
groups (hereafter called ‘‘dominant’’) showed
most consistent distribution patterns and allowed
reliable assessments of the influence of L. fortunei
on their populations. They represented around
97% of all non-bivalve invertebrates recorded in
the cages (both in terms of numbers and in
biomass). On the other hand, Tardigrada, Turbellaria,
Cladocera, Ostracoda, Insecta, Hydracarina
and Decapoda (hereafter called ‘‘scarce’’)
were recorded more sporadically and their abundance
trends had a more erratic behavior, at least
partly due to their low occurrences and abundances.
Temporal profiles for both total invertebrate
abundance and biomass (exluding the bivalve) in
areas with and without L. fortunei were generally
parallel (Tukey’s test, P = 0.200 and 0.728 respectively),
but total invertebrate numbers and biomass
(exluding the bivalve) were significantly
higher in areas with mussels than in those barren
of them (Table 2). Despite the fact that differences
between sampling dates were non-significant
(Anova, two-tailed significances; numbers:
P = 0.161; biomass: P = 0.172), for the areas with
L. fortunei there was a positive relation between
total invertebrate biomass (excluding the bivalve)
and days of underwater exposure (linear regression:
P = 0.043; R2 = 0.79; biomass = 62.002 +
0.993 days of exposure; non-transformed data).
On the other hand, the same comparison for areas
barren of L. fortunei yielded non-significant
results (P = 0.768; R2 = 0.05).
When considering isolated taxa (rather than all
invertebrates in bulk), neither abundance nor
biomass followed a common trend through time
(Fig. 3; Table 1). Oligochaeta and nauplii exhibited
a progressively growing trend, whereas for
the other taxa no general pattern was found. For
most groups temporal profiles of abundance and
biomass did not differ significantly in areas with
and without mussels (Tukey’s test, P > 0.05), with
the exception of Nematoda and Turbellaria,
whose densities differed significantly (P < 0.001
and P = 0.047, respectively).
Comparison of mean invertebrate densities and
biomass throughout the survey period shows that
all dominant groups had markedly higher values
in the areas colonized by L. fortunei, as compared
with those barren of the mussel. Barren areas
hosted 0% (Hirudinea) to 73% (Chironomidae)
of the densities present in the areas with L.
fortunei (0 to 57% in terms of biomass). For
Nematoda, Copepoda, nauplii, Oligochaeta, Rotifera
and Chironomidae these differences were
significant (numbers and/or biomass) at the 95%
level (Fig. 4; Table 2). Scarce groups had a more
erratic behavior. Many were totally absent from
areas barren of L. fortunei (Insecta, Hydracarina,
Decapoda), or were present in only 1 of the 4
samples analyzed (Tardigrada, Turbellaria,
Cladocera) (Table 1). Four of these 7 scarce
groups were, on average, more abundant in areas
colonized by L. fortunei that in those barren of
the mussel, yet other three showed the opposite
behavior (Fig. 4; Table 2).
All abundance and biomass estimates presented
so far were calculated on the basis of
substrate surface area. However, one may argue
that in areas with L. fortunei the surface area that
is actually offered for invertebrate colonization is
the surface area of the mussel bed, rather than
that of the substrate under the mussels. We
estimated that the presence of the mussels leads
to an increase in the area potentially available for
colonization of over three times, as compared
with that of the barren substrate alone. When
invertebrate biomass is calculated as a function of
surface area available for colonization (either
valve or barren substrate), differences between
mussel bed and mussel-barren areas are non
significant for all associated invertebrate groups,
as well as for all non-bivalve invertebrates in bulk.
In terms of the numbers of groups present on
each sampling date, substrates with Limnoperna
yielded slightly higher values (10–13, mean: 11.50)
that those without the mussel (8–9, mean: 8.25).

xdiscussion
Our results indicate that L. fortunei has enhancing
effects on the density and biomass of all
groups of associated invertebrates for which we
have reliable data. On average, areas with Limnoperna
hosted around 67% more of these
invertebrates than areas barren of the mussel
(numbers and biomass). Leeches and sails were
among the organisms which benefited the most
from the presence of the mussel, with increases
around 80–100%. Lowest differences were those
recorded for chironomid numbers (only 27%
more in Limnoperna-colonized areas), and nematode
biomass (43%).
The fact that benthic, byssate, bivalves enhance
the abundance, biomass (and diversity) of the
invertebrate fauna associated with their beds has
been extensively documented for D. polymorpha.
This effect has been detected in both comparative
analyses of natural assemblages with and without
zebra mussels (e.g., Silver Botts et al., 1996;
Haynes, 1997; Strayer et al., 1999; Bially &
MacIsaac, 2000), and in field experiments under
controlled conditions (Silver Botts et al., 1996;
Thayer et al., 1997; Stewart et al., 1998a, b, 1999;
Kuhns & Berg, 1999). Most of these surveys were
conducted in lentic systems, but the few carried
out in flowing waters also arrived at similar results
(Ricciardi et al., 1997). Observed increases in the
abundance of benthic invertebrate organisms in
association with D. polymorpha beds range from
38% to over 90% (Silver Boots et al., 1996;
Haynes, 1997; Ricciardi et al., 1997; Stewart
et al., 1998a, b; Kuhns & Berg, 1999; Bially &
MacIsaac, 2000). In terms of biomass, increases as
high as 99% have been reported (Thayer et al.,
1997; Stewart et al., 1998a, b; Stewart et al.,
1999). It should be noticed that there also are
some reports pointing at the opposite effect: that
the presence of D. polymorpha has a negative
impact on the invertebrate fauna (e.g., Nalepa
et al., 1998; Lozano et al., 2001; Strayer & Smith,
2001), yet the overwhelming majority of the
surveys do not support this conclusion.
The increase in the abundance, biomass and
diversity of benthic invertebrates as a response to
mussel beds has been commonly attributed to
improved food availability provided by the mussel’s
feces and pseudofeces, and enhanced habitat
resources and shelter from predators (Silver Botts
et al., 1996; Thayer et al., 1997; Stewart et al.,
1998a, b, 1999; Kuhns & Berg, 1999). Because the
cages used in our work were protected with 5 mm
plastic screens, higher invertebrate densities in
association with Limnoperna cannot be attributed
to enhanced protection from fish predators. On
the other hand, exposure to smaller predators, for
which the 5 mm screen does not represent a
barrier, does not seem to differ significantly
between areas with and without Limnoperna.
Thus, higher invertebrate densities do not seem to
respond to enhanced protection form predation.
Protection from predators is but one of the
potentially beneficial effects of a broader range of
conditions derived from increased substrate complexity.
Indeed, substrate complexity provides
additional area structuring thus creating new
microhabitats and maximizing space usage. Vertical
buildup of the Limnoperna bed adds a new
dimension to the benthic environment available
for colonization. Furthermore, structurally complex
substrates are more efficient at buffering
physical strains like wave and current action, thus
facilitating the retention of fauna and food in the
system (Klerks et al., 1996; Stewart et al., 1999
and 2003). Although abundance/biomass enhancements
in areas colonized by Limnoperna (with
respect to those barren of the mussel) are roughly
proportional to the increase in available surface
represented by the valves of the intervening
bivalves (see above), we contend that the mechanisms
involved are not associated with a simple
increase in the colonizable surface. Indeed, almost
none of the invertebrates recorded are sessile
organisms whose growth could be limited by the
availability of substrate for settling. Almost all
crawl around actively, and it is the crevices under
an between the mussels, rather than the surfaces of
their valves, the new setting most likely to boost
their densities (Stewart et al., 2003).
The extra supply of organic matter represented
by the mussels’ feces and pseudofeces has often
been found of major importance for the growth of
fauna associated with the mussel beds (e.g.,
Ricciardi, 1998; Gonza´ lez & Downig, 1999;
Greenwood et al., 2001). Ancillary information
derived from our data does not seem to support
this relationship. For example, because the volume
of feces and pseudofeces produced by a
mussel bed grows with the mussels’ biomass, one
could expect higher biomasses of L. fortunei to be
responsible for larger invertebrate populations;
such a relationship is not present in our samples.
However, our experimental design was not aimed
at separating the influences of substrate complex-
ity from organic matter enrichment, and the
results recorded are most probably a combined
outcome of both effects (Stewart et al., 1998a;
Bially & MacIsaac, 2000).
Supply of organic matter by feces and pseudofeces
would primarily benefit deposit-feeding
animals, such as oligochaetes, gastropods, as well
as some rotifers, leeches and copepods. However,
a stronger increase among these, as compared
with the predators, cannot be used as evidence of
the effects of feces and pseudofeces on the
assemblages because predators would also increase
in response to a larger supply of depositfeeding
preys. Our results agree with this insofar
as there do not seem to be clear cut differences in
the increases of the different trophic groups of
associated invertebrates.
In addition to increases in abundance and
biomass, golden mussels seem to promote larger
invertebrate sizes. Comparison of the mean sizes
of oligochaetes, chironomids and gastropods in
areas with and without Limnoperna indicates that
the former are always larger than the latter
(paired t-tests, P < 0.001 in all cases). It is
conceivable that this effect reflects differences in
competition for refuge in the unstructured, Limnoperna-
barren areas, versus the highly structured
Limnoperna-populated ones (Stewart et al.,
1999). Interstitial habitats between bivalve shells
can be preferred by the fauna for being predationsafe.
Smaller individuals of some benthic species
have been observed to be inter-specifically outcompeted
from such safer positions by larger
sizes, that consequently dominate (Stewart et al.,
1999). This type of segregation can be both intraand
interspecific. In the present work the larger
gastropod H. piscium was proportionally more
abundant in mussel-populated areas, whereas
smaller morphotypes (Planorbidae) dominated
in areas without mussels.
Admittedly, direct extrapolation of these results
to natural conditions should be done with
caution. The smooth surface of the artificial
substrates used, PVC panels, do not have a closely
comparable counterpart in nature. It is probable
that the rough surface of naturally available hard
substrates, such as rocks, wood debris and plant
roots, host higher invertebrate densities than
those recorded on the barren PVC plates. However,
we contend that the main trends found in this
survey are so strong and consistent that even a
somewhat weaker effect than the one found under
these artificial conditions would be significant
enough to affect the ecosystem profoundly.
As shown in Fig. 3, in areas colonized by
Limnoperna total invertebrate biomass (excluding
the bivalve) increased gradually from early
autumn (April 2003) through late summer (March
2004), in agreement with the increase in the
biomass of the mussel. This growth in invertebrate
biomass was positively and significantly
correlated with exposure time under water
(R2 = 0.79). Invertebrate numbers also generally
followed the same trend, with the exception of the
last retrieval date, when overall densities were
lower than 3 months earlier (Fig. 3). However,
comparison of the bars in Fig. 3 may be deceiving
because overall density differences between the
last two retrieval dates reflect the numeric dominance
of a single very abundant taxon: the
rotifers, which dropped from ca. 200,000 ind. m–2
in December 2003 to 40,000 ind. m–2 in March
2004 (Table 1). Indeed, with the exception of the
rotifers and chironomids, all other invertebrates
(6 taxa out of a total of 8) were more abundant in
March 2004 than in December 2003 (Table 1).
As in the areas with Limnoperna, the temporal
evolution of invertebrate colonization in areas
barren of Limnoperna grows between the first
and the second retrieval dates, but from there on
the profiles differ strongly insofar as in the latter
no further increases in biomass are observed,
numbers changing erratically among retrieval
dates (Fig. 3). These trends are similar to those
observed by other authors in association with the
zebra mussel (e.g., Silver Boots et al., 1996;
Strayer et al., 1999), suggesting that that substrates
with and without mussels have different
carrying capacities of accompanying invertebrates,
and that barren substrates saturate earlier.
The effects of introduced bivalve populations on
the ecosystems derive mainly from their high
filtering activity. Filtration processes at the river
bottom lead to benthic-pelagic coupling that in
turns drives changes at other levels of aquatic
ecosystems. Thus, in addition to changes in the
benthic fauna, many other effects have been
described, including increase in water clarity,
enhanced macrophyte growth, acceleration of
sedimentation rates, alteration of nutrient cycling,
drops in phytoplankton and zooplankton abundances
and consequent alterations of higher
trophic levels, etc. (Phelps, 1994; Caraco et al.,
1997; James et al., 1997; Karatayev et al., 1997;
Baker et al., 1998; Pace et al., 1998; Strayer et al.,
1999). Filtration rates of the golden mussel are as
high, or even higher, than those of the zebra
mussel (Sylvester et al., 2005), and its densities in
the South American water bodies invaded can
reach values as high as 150,000 ind. m–2 (Darrigran
2002; Boltovskoy et al., 2006). This, and the
results presented herein, indicate that Limnoperna
exerts a very strong influence on the systems
invaded. It is likely that the cascading effect of its
direct impacts on the plankton (Cataldo et al.,
2005; Sylvester et al., 2005), on the bottom fauna
(this work), and on fish larvae (Paolucci et al.,
2005), is responsible for Argentina’s 300%
increase in the freshwater fish landings of the last
decade (Boltovskoy et al., 2006).
Strayer & Smith (2001) and Strayer et al.
(2004) suggested that the impact of the zebra
mussel upon riverine ecosystems is not determined
solely by what happens at the mussel bed,
but it can also impact over distant habitats by
increasing water transparency and altering planktonic
communities, sedimentation rates, and
nutrient cycling in the entire system. These
authors concluded that the increase in invertebrate
numbers in association with exotic bivalves,
that has commonly been the outcome of many
similar works, occurs basically at mussel beds,
whereas away from these invertebrate numbers
are depressed and the overall effects on the
benthos and on fish production (in the Hudson
river) are negative.
However, there are important differences
between the Hudson river and the Parana´ -
Uruguay-Rı´o de la Plata watershed which may
lead to dissimilar consequences of the invasion
by exotic filter-feeding bivalves. Fish of the
Hudson river, in particular the native species,
are mostly planktivorous, and therefore do not
benefit directly from zebra mussels as food,
while they are negatively impacted by competition
with the mussels for plankton (Pace et al.,
1998; Strayer & Smith, 2001). In contrast, the
South American river system invaded by Limnoperna
hosts an abundant fish fauna that
intensely preys on the entire golden mussel size
range (Montalto et al., 1999; Penchaszadeh
et al., 2000; Paolucci et al., 2005; Sylvester et al.,
in press). Plankton in these waters is scarce
(Boltovskoy et al., 1995; de Cabo et al., 2003),
and planktivorous species are accordingly exceptional
(Agostinho et al., 1997), the entire system
being driven by detrital sources of energy. Thus,
deposit feeding fishes that cannot consume
Limnoperna directly can still benefit from the
enrichment of sediments with organic matter due
to the mussel’s production of feces and pseudofeces
(Thayer et al., 1997), and to the
enhancement of invertebrate densities in association
with mussel beds (Thayer et al., 1997;
Kuhns & Berg, 1999; this work). Because South
American rivers host few native filter-feeding
organisms, of which only Corbicula fluminea can
occasionally be abundant, we contend that
before the arrival of Limnoperna benthic-pelagic
coupling mechanisms were few and weak. As
much as 2,000,000 tn of particulated organic
carbon carried downriver are flushed into the
sea each year (Depetris & Kempe, 1993; Guerrero
et al., 1997). With the appearance of
L. fortunei part of this organic matter is intercepted
and modified into a form available to
organisms that cannot feed on small particles,
like many benthic invertebrates and fishes (Boltovskoy
et al., 2006).
It should be stressed that both the populations
of invasive species, and their effects on the
ecosystems invaded, including densities of associated
benthic invertebrates, are dynamic and
often depend on time after colonization. In
Europe and North America zebra mussels
have been observed to peak strongly shortly
after colonization, but then decline significantly
until stabilizing at relatively low levels,
their impact decreasing accordingly as well
(Karatayev, 1994; Haynes et al., 1999). In other
cases, however, zebra mussel population densities
did not change once they reached a
maximum (Burlakova et al., in press). Since the
golden mussel invaded South America around
1990 (Pastorino et al., 1993), and for Dreissena
post-peak declines were observed around 10–
15 years after initial colonization (Karatayev,
1994; Karatayev et al., 1997), Limnoperna’s
densities in the system are probably already
stable. Future shifts in its impact may be
expected from the time-lag it takes other
populations to adjust to the invader, and to
the fact that Limnoperna is still very actively
moving north up the Parana´ river system (e.g.,
Avelar et al., 2004), and invasion of the Amazon
basin seems only a question of time
(Boltovskoy et al., 2006). Thus, even if locally
the impact of the species may wane somewhat,
globally it will most probably keep growing.
Much research needs to be done before we
can fully understand and acceptably quantify
the impacts of Limnoperna on large South
American floodplain rivers. Previous work has
shown significant direct interactions with fishes
(Sylvester et al., in press), which may account
for the strong increase in freshwater fish catches
since ca. 1994 (Boltovskoy et al., 2006). The
results of the present survey reinforce previous
conclusions pointing at additional biotic
enhancements of trophic pathways driven by
the invasive mussel. While confirming some of
the early predictions of the potential impact of
this species on the system invaded (e.g., Ricciardi,
1998; MacNeill, 2001), our results also
point at strong dissimilarities with the effects of
Dreissena polymorpha in Europe and North
America. These differences seem to largely
respond to environmental contrasts between
the systems invaded, rather than to dissimilarities
between the species involved.