xabstract
Invasive primary producers can dramatically reorganize food webs through detrital subsidies.
This study assessed (1) contributions of the invasive alga Caulerpa taxifolia to detrital
resources of temperate Australian estuaries, and (2) effects of these contributions on sedimentdwelling
invertebrates. In an invaded estuary, sampling of an intertidal shore indicated C. taxifolia
fragments were consistently present in organic matter deposits and were particularly abundant following
storms. Sampling of the alga across 6 invaded estuaries showed that the ratio of organic carbon
to nitrogen (C:N) in fresh tissue varied between 7 and 16. To determine how C. taxifolia detritus
influences benthic macrofaunal assemblages and whether this influence depends on the quantity and
C:N ratio of C. taxifolia detritus, a manipulative field experiment was performed. On a sheltered
intertidal mudflat, 0.25 m2 plots of sediment were experimentally enriched with either a high (90 g
DW) or low (30 g) loading of high C:N (14) or low C:N (7) C. taxifolia detritus. Experimental enrichment
negatively affected the total abundance and species richness of macroinvertebrates relative to
controls, and these effects increased with detrital loading. For some macrofauna, reducing the C:N
ratio tended to exacerbate negative effects on abundances, whereas it moderated these effects for
other species. Given that organic matter derived from invasive species can be transported beyond the
distribution of live invaders, greater consideration should be given to the potential broad-scale effects
of invasive primary producers on detrital pathways.

xintroduction
Detritus (i.e. decaying dedead organic matter) serves
as an important source of energy and nutrients in many
aquatic and terrestrial food webs (Polis & Strong 1996,
Moore et al. 2004). Detritus is directly consumed by
some detritivores (Findlay & Tenore 1982) or is the
indirect source of nutrition for other organisms that
consume microorganisms stimulated by detrital breakdown
(Rublee 1982). Detritivores are in turn eaten by
secondary consumers that fuel higher trophic levels
(e.g. Chen & Wise 1999).
Detritus is frequently transported across ecosystem
boundaries by water, wind or animals (see Polis et al.
1997). Hence, the detritus supporting a particular food
web may come from autochthonous or allochthonous
sources, which are of varying value to food webs
(Moore et al. 2004). Refractory sources of detritus,
which have a high carbon to nitrogen ratio (C:N), are
composed of complex structural materials, providing
more prolonged nutrition to slow growing consumers
with powerful digestive mechanisms (Tenore et al.
1979). Detritus derived from less structurally complex
biota with a high nitrogen content, termed labile
sources, typically degrades rapidly and produces a
short-term nutritional source to fast growing consumers
(Tenore 1977). Although the C:N ratio of detritus
can change during degradation (Anderson 1973,
Suberkropp et al. 1976), the starting C:N ratio is a good
predictor of decomposition rate (Enriquez et al. 1993).
Invasive primary producers are an increasingly large
component of detrital pools (Kennedy & Hobbie 2004,
Rodil et al. 2008) and have the potential to markedly
alter their value. Many successful invaders have rapid
individual growth, early maturity, a short life span,
high fecundity, minimal structural defence and extensive
dispersal capacity (Lodge 1993, Schaffelke et al.
2006). Consequently, invasive primary producers tend
to generate large amounts of labile detritus with a low
C:N ratio, which is more readily decomposed than is
litter from native species (Vitousek et al. 1987, Ashton
et al. 2005). Whereas small amounts of refractory detritus
may fuel productivity, large quantities of labile
detritus may induce sediment anoxia (Pearson &
Rosenberg 1978). This phenomenon may be exacerbated
in areas of nutrient enrichment where invasive
primary producers, which tend to display plasticity in
physiological traits (Callaway et al. 2003, Funk 2008),
may acquire a much higher nitrogen content than in
less enriched environments.
In general, the potential effect of organic material
from invasive species on detrital pathways of nutrition
is rarely considered. The first studies to address effects
of invasive species on detritus considered only
changes in the decomposition processes (e.g. Allison &
Vitousek 2004, Kennedy & Hobbie 2004, Ashton et al.
2005). Recent studies have now begun to consider
effects propagating through the food web to consumers
(Levin et al. 2006, Rodil et al. 2008, Whitcraft et
al. 2008, Casu et al. 2009). No studies have investigated
whether effects are greater when the detrital
material has come from a source growing in nutrientenriched
environments, where the invasive plant may
rapidly assimilate nitrogen, making its detritus a more
labile resource.
Caulerpa taxifolia (Vahl) C. Agardh is an invasive
marine macroalga from the phylum Chlorophyta, of
which 7 of the 9 orders contain introduced species
(Schaffelke et al. 2006). The invasive alga earned notoriety
from its proliferation in the Mediterranean (see
Meinesz et al. 2001), but since 2000 has also established
in 13 estuaries or coastal lakes of New South
Wales (NSW), Australia. Research into C. taxifolia has
focused largely on its range expansion (e.g. Meinesz et
al. 2001) and effects of the live alga on local seagrass
populations (Ceccherelli & Cinelli 1997, Ceccherelli &
Sechi 2002, Holmer et al. 2009), epi- and in-fauna (Gollan
& Wright 2006, Wright et al. 2007, Gribben et al.
2009, McKinnon et al. 2009) and fish assemblages
(York et al. 2006). Also, C. taxifolia also has the potential
to markedly alter detrital pools. C. taxifolia easily
fragments and can be transported large distances
(Ceccherelli & Cinelli 1999, West et al. 2009), it contains
the secondary metabolite Caulerpenyne that can
deter some herbivores and limit fouling (Lemée et al.
1993, Amade & Lemée 1998). Caulerpa spp. are known
to rapidly assimilate nitrogen from their environments
(Chisholm & Moulin 2003, Lapointe et al. 2005).
This study provides the first assessment of the effects
of detritus derived from Caulerpa taxifolia. An observational
component documents the contribution of
C. taxifolia to detrital resources of temperate Australian
estuaries, whilst a detrital addition experiment
assesses effects of C. taxifolia detritus to sediment
communities. It is anticipated that (1) in an invaded
estuary, C. taxifolia will be a temporally persistent,
though proportionately variable, component of wrack
deposits; (2) among invaded estuaries, the C:N ratio of
the material deposited will be spatio-temporally variable;
and (3) the quantity and initial quality of C. taxifolia
detritus enriching sediments will determine the
effect on infaunal assemblages. The detrital addition
experiment thereby provides the first test of how plasticity
in the traits of an invader (C:N ratio) can affect its
consumers. Understanding effects of invasive species
on detrital resources is critical, given the importance of
this pathway in determining food web structure.


xmethods
To determine whether in an invaded estuary
Caulerpa taxifolia is a persistent component of
wrack deposits and displays significant temporal variability
in its contribution, monthly samples of wrack
(dislodged macrophytic matter) were collected between
February and July 2007 from the southern side of
Botany Bay (33° 59’ S, 151° 12’ E), a large embayment,
15 km south of Sydney. On each sampling date, 5 replicate
samples of wrack, floating in the shallow water of
the intertidal zone (~mean low water [MLW], +0.4 to
0.6 m), were collected at each of 2 sites using a 250 ×
190 mm dip net. The sites were 260 m apart and were
not places where living C. taxifolia was growing. Each
site was sampled on an incoming tide at ~0.5 m water
depth. We chose to sample wrack on, rather than below,
the sediment surface because the particulate
nature of material incorporated into sediments makes it
difficult to identify to species. We also expected that C.
taxifolia in sediments would rapidly decompose, making
the standing stock in sediments a poor metric of the
contribution of C. taxifolia to detrital pathways. Observations
of some larger C. taxifolia fragments in sedi-
ments in these and other sites around Botany Bay indicate
that much of this material ends up in sediments.
In the laboratory, wrack samples were washed over a
6.7 mm sieve to remove sand and shell grit. In each
sample, Caulerpa taxifolia was separated from other
wrack components, dried at 60°C to a constant weight
(DW), and weighed. The combined DW of the other
detrital fractions was also determined to calculate the
percentage contribution of C. taxifolia to the total
detrital biomass. The temporal contribution of C. taxifolia
to wrack deposits was then used to ascertain high
and low loadings to be added to sediments in the
manipulative field experiment, also conducted in this
estuary (see ‘Experimental namipulation of quantity
and quality of detritus’).
To ascertain how the C:N ratio of Caulerpa taxifolia
varies across large spatio-temporal scales, C. taxifolia
was collected from 6 estuaries where the alga is established:
Pittwater (33° 35’ S, 151° 19’ E), Botany Bay
(34° 00’ S, 151° 14’ E), St Georges Basin (35° 11’ S,
150° 36’ E), Lake Conjola (35° 16’ S, 150° 30’ E), Narrawallee
Inlet (35° 18’ S, 150° 28’ E) and Burrill Lake
(35° 24’ S, 150° 27’ E). Within each estuary, a 200 to
300 g sample of live C. taxifolia was randomly taken
from at least 1 location, but more typically 2 to 3, separated
by kilometres. Where possible, samples were collected
from each location on multiple dates during the
warm months (November to May; see Table 1). Each
sample was dried at 60°C prior to transport back to the
laboratory to avoid any changes in C:N ratio as a result
of degradation. Upon return to the laboratory, each
sample was ground into a fine powder using a ball mill.
Total organic C and N of a ~0.2 g sub-sample were
determined as a percentage using a CHN analyser
(Leco TrueSpec CN). We ascertained the C:N ratio of
live material as opposed to wrack, to minimise variability
due to differences in the age of the material. A pilot
study in Botany Bay indicated that the C:N ratio of
fresh wrack samples washed up on shore was within
the range found within live specimens collected from
this estuary.
A field experiment investigating effects of
Caulerpa taxifolia detritus on soft sediment macrofauna
was done on an intertidal mudflat in Quibray
Bay (33° 59’ S, 151° 12’ E), on the south side of Botany
Bay (Bishop et al. 2007). The mudflat receives organic
matter inputs from an adjacent Avicennia marina mangrove
forest, intertidal and shallow subtidal seagrasses,
and seasonally, from dense patches of C. taxifolia
within and around the seagrass (S. L. Taylor pers.
obs.). Experimental enrichments of C. taxifolia detritus
were done at a tidal height of MLW neap + 0.4 m, in
0.25 m2 sediment plots, separated by 1 m and marked
with a PVC stake such that they were open to mobile
species. A small spatial scale was chosen for manipulation
of C. taxifolia detritus because mudflats are typically
‘patchy’ in resources on a spatial scale of metres
(Thrush 1991, Kelaher & Levinton 2003), with organic
material tending to accumulate in depressions formed
by bioturbation e.g. by sting rays.
The experiment had 5 treatments: 2 fully orthogonal
factors, quantity and quality of Caulerpa taxifolia detritus,
each with 2 fixed levels, and an unenriched control.
The 2 levels of detrital quantity were high (90 g
DW) and low (30 g DW). The high quantity was based
on observations of C. taxifolia washed up on shores following
severe storms in winter, the season in which
there is also typically a reduction in C. taxifolia biomass
(see ‘Results’). The low quantity represented a
deposit more likely to occur during normal weather
periods. The 2 levels of detrital quality were nitrogenrich
(low C:N of 7.5 ± 0.3, n = 4, from Silver Beach,
NSW) and nitrogen-poor (high C:N of 13.9 ± 0.9, n = 4,
from Pittwater, NSW) C. taxifolia detritus. Two detrital
qualities were used following evidence of differences
in C:N ratios of C. taxifolia among and within NSW
estuaries (see ‘Results’). The 2 different quality types
were harvested from live beds of C. taxifolia, dried at
60°C to constant weight and the quality determined
using CHN analysis as described above. The control
treatment did not receive any detritus but was otherwise
treated identically to the C. taxifolia addition
treatments. Seven plots were randomly assigned to
each of the 5 treatments.
Caulerpa taxifolia was added to plots assigned to the
addition treatments in a dried, shredded (<2 mm diameter)
form. This was to represent natural wrack, which
on mud flats experiences drying at low tide and often
needs to be mechanically broken down before it can be
incorporated into intertidal sediments. Drying the C.
taxifolia before adding it to the plots also prevented
significant decomposition from occurring between collection
and the experiment, which would have lead to
heterogeneity in C:N ratio. When rehydrated in the
sediment, the detritus was expected to break down
and subsequently the C:N ratio would change, but the
starting quality was constant for all replicates within a
treatment. Experimental additions of detritus were
performed by hand-churning the shredded C. taxifolia
into the top few centimetres of experimental plots. Previous
studies have shown this method of addition successfully
manipulates detrital quantity at this and other
sites (see Kelaher & Levinton 2003, Bishop & Kelaher
2008). Furthermore, trials with recalcitrant Juncus sp.
detritus indicated that only 10% of the material mixed
into sediments using this method is washed out over
a 1 mo period (M. J. Bishop unpub.). To control for
the physical disturbance of sediments associated with
detrital addition, control plots received similar hand-
churning as detrital addition treatments. Undisturbed
control plots were not included in the design because
a previous study on the same mudflat found that in
the absence of detrital enrichment, there is no significant
difference in invertebrate communities between
churned and undisturbed plots (Bishop et al. 2007).
After 7 wk, macroinvertebrates were sampled from
each experimental plot using a 100 mm internal diameter
corer depressed to a depth of 100 mm. Cores were
washed through a 500 μm sieve and all fauna retained
on the sieve were fixed in 8% buffered formalin and
then transferred to 70% ethanol for enumeration and
identification to either species level or, where this was
not possible, morphospecies (Oliver & Beattie 1996).
Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
tested for differences of Caulerpa taxifolia DW in
wrack among sampling dates (monthly, February to
July) and between the 2 study sites (n = 5). One-way
ANOVA tested for differences in C:N ratio of C. taxifolia
samples among the 19 collections made over a 5 mo
period from 13 sites distributed across 6 estuaries (n =
2, see Table 1 for details of each collection). Samples
collected from multiple sites within an estuary and
from an estuary at multiple times were considered
independent. Differences between these samples from
within a single estuary were just as great as between
samples that had come from different estuaries. Prior
to each ANOVA, homogeneity of variances was tested
using Cochran’s C test, which was found to be nonsignificant
for all tests. A posteriori Student-Newman-
Keuls (SNK) tests identified significant differences
among the means of treatments when ANOVA was
significant.
Non-metric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) was
used to produce a 2D ordination of macrofaunal
assemblages present in cores of sediment collected
from the field experiment. The ordination was based
on a Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrix (Bray & Curtis
1957) derived from untransformed data. Hypotheses
about the effects of Caulerpa taxifolia detritus on
infaunal communities were tested using 1-way nonparametric
multivariate analyses of variance (PERMANOVA,
Anderson 2001) on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity
measures derived from untransformed data. The
single factor, treatment, had 5 levels: the control plus
the 4 experimental treatments. The SIMPER (Similarity
of Percentages) routine in PRIMER version 5.2.7
(Primer-E) identified species that were important discriminators
of macroinvertebrate assemblages among
treatments (dissimilarity to SD ratio >1.3, Clarke 1993).
One-way ANOVA was used to assess the effects of
Caulerpa taxifolia detrital addition on the abundance
and species richness of infauna as well as taxa identified
by SIMPER as key species. As with the PERMANOVA,
the single factor treatment had 5 levels.
Homogeneity of variances was confirmed using
Cochran’s C test, and SNK tests were used for a posteriori
comparisons (as above).

xresults
At each of the two sites in Botany Bay, Caulerpa taxifolia
was present in wrack deposits at all 6 sampling
times (February to July 2007). At one of the sites, the
contribution of the alga to wrack deposits peaked in
February (ANOVA: month × site: F5,48 = 5.64, p =
0.0004; SNK, Site 1: March = April = July = May = June
< February), but at the other site, a peak was seen in
June following winter storms, which coincided with
the natural annual regression of C. taxifolia (SNK,
Site 2: March = May = February = July = April < June).
At the first site, the contribution by weight of the alga
to total wrack deposits remained <1%, even during the
February peak. At the second site, the June influx of C.
taxifolia inflated the contribution of the non-native
species from a baseline of <1% to 13 ± 5% of total
wrack.
Sampling ofCaulerpa taxifolia from13 sites distributed
across 6 estuaries revealed significant spatio-temporal
variability in the C:N ratio of the alga (ANOVA: F18,19 =
50.13, p < 0.0001, Table 1). The highest C:N was 15.9 ±
0.0 at St Georges Basin, while the lowest C:N ratio of
7.2 ± 0.2 was recorded in Botany Bay.
A total of 3568 invertebrates from 41 species were
identified from the manipulative experiment. Polychaetes
and gastropods were the 2 most diverse groups,
contributing 12 and 11 different species, respectively.
The sabellid polychaete Euchone variabilis constituted
57% of the total number of individuals sampled.
Infaunal assemblages in control plots were significantly
different from those receiving Caulerpa taxifolia
detritus (PERMANOVA: pseudo-F4,30 = 9.86, p < 0.001;
Fig. 1). There was a clear effect of quantity of detritus,
but no significant effect of the quality of C. taxifolia
detritus on macroinvertebrate assemblages (pairwise
tests: [90 g, low C:N = 90 g, high C:N] ≠ [30 g, low C:N
= 30 g, high C:N] ≠ Control; Fig. 1).
The abundance of macroinvertebrates was reduced
significantly in plots enriched with 90 g of detritus and
also, but to a lesser extent, in plots enriched with 30 g
of detritus (ANOVA: F4,30 = 25.0, p < 0.001; Fig. 2a).
The quality of the detritus (low versus high C:N) had
no discernable effects on macroinvertebrate abundance
(Fig. 2a). Macroinvertebrate species richness
was reduced significantly by the addition of 90 g of
either low or high C:N detritus (ANOVA: F4,30 = 6.0,
p < 0.01), whereas the 30 g additions had no significant
effects on richness (Fig. 2b).
SIMPER analyses identified 4 taxa –– the polychaetes
Euchone variabilis and Nephtys australiensis,
the gastropod Salinator fragilis and a gammarid amphipod
morphospecies –– as good discriminators of macrofaunal
assemblages among treatments.
Patterns for total macroinvertebrate
abundance were driven primarily by
the numerically dominant polychaete
E. variabilis, which showed the same
significant reduction in abundances
with increases in quantity of detritus,
but no significant effect of detrital
quality (ANOVA: F4,30 = 18.4, p <
0.001). There was, however, a non-significant
trend for numbers of E. variabilis
to be reduced more by the lower
quality detritus in the 90 g addition
treatments (Fig. 2c). Patterns for the
gammarid amphipod were essentially
the same as those for E. variabilis, with
abundances decreasing with increasing
quantity of detritus (ANOVA:
F4,30 = 4.5, p < 0.01; Fig. 2d). SNK tests
could not, however, resolve any differences
among the 30 g low or high quality
detritus and the 90 g high quality
treatment (Fig. 2d).
Abundances of the polychaete
Nephtys australiensis were reduced significantly by
the addition of 90 g of high quality detritus (ANOVA:
F4,30 = 10.8, p < 0.001; Fig. 2e). Again, a posteriori comparisons
of means could not unequivocally discriminate
differences among the other treatments, but there
was a clear trend for high quality detritus to have the
most negative impact on abundances of N. australiensis
for both the 30 and 90 g additions (Fig. 2e). Detrital
additions had no significant effects on abundances of
the gastropod Salinator fragilis (ANOVA: F4,30 = 1.1,
p > 0.30). Interestingly the pattern among treatments
for S. fragilis was the opposite of that for the other taxa,
with means of all detrital addition treatments being
greater than the unenriched control (Fig. 2f).

xdiscussion
The alteration of detrital food webs by the organic
material of invasive plants has received little attention.
Siphonous green seaweeds, such as Caulerpa taxifolia,
C. racemosa and Codium fragile ssp. fragile are highly
successful invaders of aquatic ecosystems. Due to their
high productivity and rapid growth, these species have
the potential to contribute significantly to organic
matter supply. This study demonstrated that the invasive
alga C. taxifolia provides a temporally persistent
source of organic matter to spatially subsidize estuarine
soft-sediments. Its contribution to wrack resources
was highly variable and, following a storm event in
winter, when live C. taxifolia biomass can regress
(Glasby et al. 2005), was as high as 13 ± 5%. Furthermore,
the enrichment experiment indicated that such
pulses of C. taxifolia wrack influence negatively on the
abundance and species richness of macroinvertebrate
populations.
Both low and high loadings of sediment with
Caulerpa taxifolia wrack reduced the overall abundance
of macroinvertebrates relative to unenriched
control plots. The magnitude of negative effects increased
with the volume of C. taxifolia material added.
Negative responses of invertebrate communities to
organic enrichment have also been seen following
addition of large volumes of some other types of wrack
to estuarine sediments, presumably due to sufficient
stimulation of microbial processes to deplete sediment
oxygen (Rossi 2006). The negative effects of C. taxifolia
on macroinvertebrates were, however, far greater
than those previously observed following the addition
of other detrital sources to Botany Bay sediments. The
addition of 90 g of litter from the eelgrass Zostera
capricorni or from a mixture of sources including the
strap weed Posidonia australis, the alga Sargassum sp.
and the mangrove Avicennia marina did not reduce
macroinvertebrate abundance over a similar 2 mo
period (Bishop et al. 2007, Bishop & Kelaher 2008).
Other algal sources (Ecklonia radiata, Sargassum sp.,
or Phyllospora comosa) reduced abundances by only
10 to 30% (Bishop et al. 2010), not the 70% seen here
following loading with C. taxifolia. In the present
study, the reduction of abundances in experimental
plots receiving C. taxifolia were unanticipated as plots
never exhibited any evidence of surface anoxia, such
as black patches or the presence of white, sulphurreducing
bacteria.
Secondary metabolites may have contributed to the
negative effects of Caulerpa taxifolia detritus. The
abundance of almost all invertebrate taxa decreased
following addition of C. taxifolia detritus to plots, but
one species showed a slight increase in numbers. Even
opportunistic taxa such as capitellids and oligochaetes
did not display their paradigmatic proliferation following
organic enrichment (cf. Pearson & Rosenberg 1978,
Beukema 1991). Only the gastropod Salinator fragilis,
a surface dwelling grazer, was more abundant in
enriched than control plots. On the surface of the sediment,
S. fragilis would be less exposed to C. taxifolia
detritus than infaunal taxa and may, in fact, have benefited
from the alga as a result of the negative influence
of C. taxifolia on competitors. Studies examining
the nutritional quality of macroalgal detritus have
emphasized the inhibitory role of secondary metabolites
on detritivores (Hanson & Tenore 1981, Enriquez
et al. 1993, Duggins & Eckman 1997). Amade & Lemée
(1998) found degraded caulerpenynes in seawater can
still inhibit larval recruitment of sea urchins; however,
the capacity for caulerpenynes to influence the structure
of detritivore communities has not been directly
assessed and more research is needed in this area.
Like other foliose green macroalgae, Caulerpa taxifolia
rapidly absorbs nutrients from the water column, but
it also has the ability to fix nitrogen from its substrate
(Chisholm et al. 1996, Ceccherelli & Cinelli 1997,
Chisholm & Moulin 2003). It was predicted that the C:N
ratio of live C. taxifolia would vary in space and time,
presumably in response to environmental nutrient
availability and therefore, the detritus emanating from
these sources would also be of differing quality. Predictions
were also made that more labile C. taxifolia detritus,
of lower C:N ratio, would exacerbate the negative
effects of the high quantity treatment by further stimulating
microbial productivity and sediment anoxia.
Sampling of 6 estuaries revealed that the alga’s C:N ratio
ranged from 7 to 16, which greatly exceeded variation
amongst other wrack contributors (e.g. Avicennia
marina C:N ratio: 26.3 ± 0.1, n = 2; Posidonia australis:
23.0 ± 0.1, n = 2; Zostera capricorni: 22.8 ± 0.3, n = 2;
Bishop & Kelaher 2008, B. P. Kelaher unpubl.).
The manipulative experiment confirmed Caulerpa
taxifolia detritus significantly affected abundances of
certain macrofauna regardless of whether its C:N ratio
was at the lower or higher end of the range. At the high
detrital loading of 90 g, there was a weak trend for a
greater abundance of Euchone variabilis in plots with
high rather than with low C:N detritus as predicted
under the hypothesis of exacerbation of anoxic effects.
But at the low detrital loading of 30 g, no difference in
the abundance of E. variabilis was evident between
quality treatments. The predatory polychaete Nephtys
australiensis displayed the opposite pattern, with a
weak indication of greater abundance in the low rather
than the high C:N treatment. Increasing the nitrogen
content of detritus tends to accelerate decomposition
processes (Tenore et al.1979, Mann 1988) and hence
promote secondary production (Findlay 1982, Levinton
& Stewart 1988). Nevertheless, it was the predator not
the detritivore that appeared to benefit from more
labile detritus. This may reflect the top-down force of
predation offsetting any bottom-up effect of the labile
detritus on detritivore abundance.
In the present study, the effect of the initial quality of
Caulerpa taxifolia detritus was much weaker (and
never statistically significant) than the effect of quantity.
It is important to note, however, that each of the
estuaries from which C. taxifolia was collected were
relatively oligotrophic (Scanes et al. 2007). In eutrophic
estuaries, where there is greater nitrogen availability,
it is possible that even lower C:N ratios of C. taxifolia
may be observed. Lower C:N ratios could exacerbate
negative effects of high detrital loading by stimulating
excessive bacterial metabolism that depletes sediments
of oxygen. In other ecosystems, the starting C:N
ratio of detritus is a key determinant of decomposition
rate (Enriquez et al. 1993).
Coastal marine food webs are being dramatically
altered through the shift in species composition (see
Byrnes et al. 2007). There are now over 277 introduced
macroalgal species, globally, several of which are considered
among the world’s 100 most invasive species
(Williams & Smith 2007). Our results, in combination
with those of recent studies (Rodil et al. 2008, Rossi et
al. 2010), indicate that some introduced macroalgae
can have broad-scale impacts on benthic communities
by modifying detrital subsidies. It is likely that many
other invasive macrophytes will produce similarly
large impacts for several reasons. (1) According to the
enemy release hypothesis, introduced plants should
experience a decrease in regulation by herbivores due
to the absence of their natural grazers (Keane & Crawley
2002). Hence, a higher proportion of introduced
biomass than that of the native species may enter the
detrital food web. (2) A recent review has shown that
several families of algae contribute disproportionately
to the number of invasive macroalgal species (Williams
& Smith 2007). Among these are several families well
known to contain unique chemical faunal deterrents
(e.g. Caulerpaceae, Codiaceae, Fucaceae, Ceramiaceae).
Overall, this study demonstrates that invasive algae
can impact communities that support productive detrital
food webs of estuaries. Future efforts to manage
aquatic or terrestrial invasive species and their influences
should not only consider the impacts of live
plants, but also the dead organic material from invasive
species that can be transported across ecosystem
boundaries, potentially well beyond the point of
invasion.