xabstract
We provide an example of extensive facilitation
of a sessile community throughout an invaded estuary
by the invasive snail Batillaria australis. We show that B.
australis greatly increases a limiting resource (attachment
space) to a community of sessile organisms and estimate
that a large part of the invaded estuary now contain ca. 50
times more sessile individuals associated with the invader
than all native snails combined. We argue that native snails
are unlikely to have been dramatically reduced by the
invader, and we therefore suggest that the shell-attached
sessile community, as a functional group, has benefitted
significantly from this invasion. These results expand the
current understanding of how invaded marine systems
respond to habitat-forming invaders.

xintroduction
When non-indigenous species invade new communities,
they interact with and have effects on many resident species
(Staehr et al. 2000; Crooks 2009; Altieri et al. 2010).
Similar to any other ecological network of interactions, this
leads to some residents being adversely affected while
others benefit. Ecologists have traditionally focused on
how negative species interactions structure natural communities,
but intensive research on positive effects is rectifying
this imbalance, resulting in a more nuanced
‘modern ecology’ (Stachowicz 2001). However, the traditional
perception of nature, where negative interactions are
most important, still dominates invasion ecology (Rodriguez
2006; Bulleri 2009). A key mechanism whereby
marine invaders can have positive impacts on local species
is via habitat formation (Crooks 2002; Bulleri 2009;
Thomsen et al. 2010a), a process that is particularly
important for shell-forming species (epibiosis, reviewed in
Gutierrez et al. 2003; Wahl 2009). Many studies have
documented facilitation from invasive marine shell-formers,
typically focusing on specific positively affected species
(e.g. Wonham et al. 2005) or on community
facilitation in a specific habitat or from a few study sites
(e.g. Gribben et al. 2009). However, we are not aware of
studies that have quantified community facilitation across
multiple habitats and throughout an invaded system. Such
large-scale community facilitation is most likely to occur
when an invader provides a novel function or greatly
increases the availability of a limiting resource and is
abundant in the major habitats within the invaded system
(Crooks 2002; Thomsen et al. 2010a).
Sessile species typically live attached to hard substratum,
a strongly limited resource in most estuaries where
sedimentary soft bottom prevails. Abiotic hard substratum
(e.g. rocks, boulders) is at high risk of burial by sediments
over time, but biotic shell-formers can remain on the sediment
surface and thereby provide attachment space for
sessile organisms (this resource provision also depend on
the species abundance, size, longevity, shell properties,
behaviour, and local abiotic conditions) (Gutierrez et al.
2003; Gribben et al. 2009; Wahl 2009). We recently documented
that Batillaria australis has invaded the Swan
River Estuary (the only invaded estuary in Western Australia)
and that B. australis today is by far the most
abundant snail in this estuary (Thomsen et al. 2010b). We
also made the qualitative observations that sessile organisms
are common on the shell of this invader.
The aims of our study were here to (a) quantify the
sessile communities found on dominant shell types in key
habitats in the Swan River Estuary and (b) combine these
data with known shell densities to quantify and compare
sessile communities associated with the invader versus
native shell-formers throughout key habitats in the estuary.

xmethods
From October to December 2011 (austral spring and early
summer), we collected 3,226 shells randomly by snorkelling,
covering paired seagrass beds and interspersed sandflats
shallower than 3 m depth at 13 random sites (Fig. 1)
distributed throughout the Swan River Estuary. At each site,
visual searches covering 150 m 9 150 m were made for
60–90 min. The 3,226 shells represented 7 types of shells,
including 5 forms of B. australis (Bat) and two native
species: ‘Bat Gra?’ = live adult B. australis with attached
dense fronds of the coarsely branched red alga Gracilaria
Comosa (n = 233 from seagrass beds vs. 243 from interspersed
sand-flats), ‘Bat Gra-’ = live adult B. australis
without G. comosa (n = 410 vs. 250), ‘Bat Small’ = B.
australis recruits with shell length less than 1.3 cm (n = 81
vs. 65), ‘Bat Empty’ = empty shells of adult B. australis
(n = 241 vs. 250), ‘Bat Hermit’ = shells of adult B. australis
occupied by hermit crabs (n = 240 vs. 250), ‘Bedeva’
= Bedeva paiva (n = 204 vs. 194), and
‘Nassarius’ = Nassarius pauperatus (n = 287 vs. 278).
Most shell types were found in both habitats at most sites,
except that we found few B. australis recruits and there
were no seagrass beds at site 2 (see Fig. 1) (see online S1
for replication level for each shell type). These shell types
comprise [99 % of all snail shells found in this system
(Thomsen et al. 2010b). Shells were brought to the laboratory,
and sessile epibionts directly attached to the shells
were identified and quantified under a dissection microscope.
We estimated percentage cover of modular organisms
(e.g. encrusting seaweeds and bryozoa) and counted
solitary organisms (e.g. Chaetomorpha linum, Gracilaria
comosa) on each shell. Subsequently, epibiont data (see
Fig. 2b, c) were combined with shell abundance data (from
Thomsen et al. 2010b), and the spatial extent of the sampled
region [Fig. 1; the area that is shallower than 3 m in the
middle and lower Swan River Estuary is ca. 10 km2 (pers.
com. B. Marillier) of which ca. 5.5 km2 are seagrass beds
(Hillman et al. 1995)], to calculate region-wide abundances
of solitary and modular sessile organisms associated with
invasive versus native shells, for example, sessile organisms
per region = sessile organisms per shell 9 shells per habitat
9 habitat per region. We also scaled up percentage
cover of solitary organisms to m2 per sampled region using
the following shell sizes: large B. australis = 4.7 cm2,
small B. australis = 1.5 cm2, B. paiva = 3.5 cm2, N.
pauperatus = 1.5 cm2 (Thomsen et al. unpublished data).
We used two-way PERMANOVA based on Euclidian
distances to test for the effect of habitat (fixed factors) and
shell type (fixed factors) on taxonomic richness and density
of solitary and modular epibionts (999 permutations)
(Andersen et al. 2008). Data were log x ? 1 transformed to
ensure variance homogeneity. We report densities of sessile
organisms per shell with 95 % confidence limits for
each habitat (using sites as replicates), and differences
between mean values were quantified using PERMANOVA
pairwise comparison with paired t tests. Mean values
were considered significantly different when p\0.05. The
region-wide calculations of sessile communities on different
shell types were shown without errors because error
estimates do not exist for sand and seagrass areas from the
Swan River Estuary.

xresults
We found no significant ‘habitat x shell type’ interaction
effects and no single factor effects of ‘habitat’ on differences
in sessile organisms attached to shells from seagrass
beds versus sand-flats (p[0.05 for all three tests)
(Fig. 2a–c, online S2-3). However, we found strong
patterns among shell types (p\0.001 for all three tests).
For taxonomic richness (Fig. 2a), we found most taxa
associated with live adult B. australis with G. comosa
attached, and least on B. australis recruits and Nassarius
pauperatus (the remaining three shell types were in
between). This pattern was almost identical for counts of
solitary sessile organisms (Fig. 2b), but less clear for cover
values of modular organisms, where taxonomic richness
typically overlapped between species (but with almost the
same pattern, Fig. 2c). Sessile species were, across the
sampled region, overwhelmingly associated with live adult
B. australis without G. comosa from seagrass beds and
sand-flats, as well as empty B. australis shells from seagrass
beds (Fig. 2e–f).

xdiscussion
The lowest taxonomic richness and density of solitary and
modular sessile organisms was found on B. australis
recruits and N. pauperatus. A simple explanation is that N.
pauperatus often bury themselves when not feeding,
leaving little time for epibiont settlement. Furthermore, B.
australis recruits and N. pauperatus have the smallest
shells and, in the case of N. pauperatus, are short-lived
(Brearley 2005), i.e. sessile organisms have little space or
time to settle and grow (Wernberg et al. 2010). The high
richness and densities of sessile organisms found on live
adult B. australis with G. comosa attached is partly
explained by sampling methodology; by default, this shell
type always has a minimum of ‘one species and several
individuals’ (=dense G. comosa). Nevertheless, this still
represents a true epibiota response and not a sampling
artefact.
Our data suggest that 98 % of all sessile organisms
attached to snail shells in the most common habitats of the
Swan River Estuary are associated with the invader.
Importantly, the large differences in shell densities
(Fig. 2d) were more important in determining region-wide
community abundances, than how much epibiota was
attached to individual shell types (Fig. 2b–c). We therefore
conclude that these sessile communities, which inhabit
snail shells, are likely to have benefitted significantly from
the invasion of B. australis. We envision a few objections
to this conclusion. First, we did not sample deep or lowsalinity
regions within the Swan River Estuary. However,
these regions contain relatively few sessile organisms
attached to hard substratum (pers. obs.), probably because
few habitat-formers and sessile organisms tolerate these
habitats that are characterized by high sedimentation and
sediment organic matters, low oxygen, light, and/or low
salinity (Brearley 2005). Our data are therefore applicable
in most areas of the Swan River Estuary where sessile
communities are abundant. Second, our analysis assumes
that native sessile species have not been dramatically
reduced by B. australis. There are currently no data to
suggest detrimental invasion effects on other shell-formers,
like N. pauperatus or Bedeva paiva, that also can be hosts
to sessile epibionts (Brearley 2005). For example, analysis
of 100 s of sediment cores do not suggest any large pool of
empty native shells (unpublished data and Thomsen et al.
2010b), in contrast to empty shells of the invader that can
be found in the tens of 1,000 s in ‘graveyards’ (Fig. 3). We
have also shown that even at extremely high B. australis
densities, all three snail species co-occur (Thomsen et al.
2012). Furthermore, given that only few organisms are
found attached to N. pauperatus (Fig. 2), even unrealistically
high pre-invasion densities would not affect our
conclusion. Third, B. paiva predates on mollusks and is
therefore likely to have benefitted from the invasion
because B. australis could be a new food resource. The
final objection would be that alternative hard substrates
exist in the Swan River Estuary, e.g. rocks, boulders and
pilings, and non-snail habitat-formers such as bivalves and
seagrasses (Halophila ovalis). However, this does not
change our conclusion with respect to region-wide facilitation
of sessile communities per se, but downgrades the
importance of invader facilitation if these alternative substrates
are ubiquitous and heavily fouled by similar species.
A future study should therefore quantify the abundance of
these types of substrates and their sessile communities,
although our preliminary observations suggest that live
buried bivalves contain virtually no sessile organisms, that
abiotic substrates are scattered mainly ‘surviving’ sedimentation
at shallow wave-exposed sites, and that both
abiotic substrates and seagrasses support somewhat different
sessile communities compared to B. australis (e.g.
we have not found G. comosa or C. linum attached to
seagrasses). We emphasize that our data address potential
impact on sessile organisms; supplementary studies are
needed to document impacts on other biotic communities
in the Swan River Estuary, including infaunal invertebrates,
mobile invertebrates, meiofauna, microbes, drifting
seaweeds, and fish and birds. Nevertheless, our data provide
a rare example of region-wide facilitation of a sessile
community by an invasive snail, through increased provision
of a limited resource (attachment space). We also
suggest that this process extends beyond the facilitated
sessile organisms, as these sessile organisms themselves
are ‘secondary habitat-formers/modifiers’ that, like the
‘primary habitat-formers/modifiers’ (the shell-forming
invader), provide living space, predation refugium, and
food resources to mobile invertebrate ‘end-users’, including
polychaetes, crustaceans, and small gastropods
(Thomsen et al. 2010a). This ‘habitat cascades’ process
(Thomsen et al. 2010a) is particularly important for
B. australis with attached G. comosa, because this seaweed
can grow into large fronds that dominate the habitat
structures on unvegetated sand-flats and thereby facilitate
communities of mobile invertebrates (Thomsen et al.
2010a; Thomsen et al. 2012). Finally, we suggest that
invasion ecologists should investigate the prevalence and
context whereby large-scale community-wide facilitation
occurs (is this process rare in nature or has research been
biased?) and what, if any, functional groups and alternative
communities are negatively affected when community
facilitation is reported.