xabstract
While invasive fish management is heavily focussed on containment measures when introductions occur, examples from invasive species management in terrestrial systems suggest that there may also be consider- able conservation benefits in implementing localized control programmes.We conducted a field-based experiment to assess the effectiveness of removing a globally significant invasive fish, eastern gambusia Gambusia holbrooki, from natural wetland habitats of south-eastern Australia. With recent work suggesting the impacts of eastern gambusia may be minimal for species with generalist life-history strategies, we hypothesized that the removal of eastern gambusia will reduce localized population growth of the invasive species, but will have little influence on the population growth of more generalist sympatric wetland fish species. We used a predictive modelling approach to investigate changes in eastern gambusia populations following removal activities, and how sympatric fish species responded to such changes. Although eastern gambusia rapidly populated habitats, we demonstrated that control actions substantially reduced the rate of population increase over the four-month study period. This suggests that control may be an effective localized strategy to suppress eastern gambusia densities. There was however, no evidence of any response to the removal actions by any of the three sympatric fish species investigated – carp gudgeon (Hypseleotris spp.), Australian smelt (Retropinna semoni) and the invasive common carp (Cyprinus carpio). These results support previous work which suggests that the flexible life-history strategies and behavioural traits of all three species allow co-existence with eastern gambusia. The study highlights the importance of understanding the potential outcomes of control options which is particularly pertinent for established aquatic invasive species where information on control effectiveness, population dynamics and/or ecosystem response is currently lacking.

xintroduction
Freshwater ecosystems, and their native fish assem- blages, are particularly susceptible to the deleterious effects of invasive species (Marchetti et al. 2004; Gozlan 2008). Invasive fishes have been implicated in the displacement, reduced abundance and condition, range contraction, local extirpation and extinction of many native fish species worldwide (Moyle & Light 1996; Amundsen et al. 1999; Irons et al. 2007). As a consequence, there has been considerable investment directed towards invasive fish control programmes in order to limit the negative impacts these species have on native or desirable biota (e.g. Zavaleta et al. 2001). Reducing the impacts of invasive species on eco- system processes, rather than simply controlling pest numbers, is central to effective invasive pest manage- ment (Lodge & Schrader-Frechette 2003; Koehn & Mackenzie 2004; Vander Zanden et al. 2004). To achieve this, it is essential to develop an empirical understanding of the ecological impacts of an invasive species (Braysher 1993; Koehn & Mackenzie 2004). Unfortunately, the ecological impact stemming from biological invasion is the most poorly quantified aspect of the invasion process (Kulhanek et al. 2011). Indeed, only a few studies have been able to make quantitative predictions of aquatic invader impacts to facilitate management prioritization (e.g. Parker et al. 1999; Vander Zanden et al. 2004; Kulhanek et al.
2011).
The most effective approach to managing invasive
fish is to limit new incursions and prevent future spread via containment measures. This includes gov- ernment legislation, barriers and screening as well as community education campaigns aimed at limiting the deliberate introduction of pest species by humans (Koehn & MacKenzie 2004). The focus on contain- ment of aquatic invasive species is largely because of recognition of the difficulties in managing their impacts once they have established and dispersed (Koehn & MacKenzie 2004; Vander Zanden et al. 2004; Gozlan et al. 2010). While it is generally accepted that a ‘rapid response’ approach offers the greatest benefits for managing new incursions, wide- spread and established populations of aquatic invasive species frequently go unmanaged (Ayres & Clunie 2010). Alternatively, management strategies of estab- lished populations of aquatic invasive species often concentrate on the pest rather than its damage, and simply aim to maximize the number of individuals removed (Braysher 1993). For example, despite millions of dollars being spent annually on common carp Cyprinus carpio control throughout Australia’s Murray–Darling Basin, their impact on Australian native biota remains largely speculative, with quanti- tative information limited to localized impacts on water quality and aquatic plants (Roberts et al. 1995; King et al. 1997; Robertson et al. 1997). Clearly, any such reductions of an invasive species can present opportunities to investigate their ecological impacts provided they are undertaken in an experimentally robust manor. For example, Lintermans (2000) in- vestigated the impacts of the introduced rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss on native mountain galaxias Galaxias olidus following the eradication of trout from an Australian stream.
While opportunities for effective management of widespread and well established invasive fishes remain limited, localized control programmes that reduce the abundance the species are still a viable option (Gozlan et al. 2010). There are, however, very few examples of such mitigation schemes for managing established invasive fish populations. This is due in part to a poor understanding of the impacts of the invasive species and the logistical difficulties associated with what is often perceived as the primary management objec- tives, to eradicate or contain. Localized control or mitigation programmes are, however, relatively com- monplace in terrestrial and agricultural vertebrate pest management, not because control strategies for these species have an increased chance of eradication, but rather, because of a greater understanding of how biota (e.g. Hone 1995) or agricultural productivity (e.g. Ramsey & Wilson 2000) respond when control programmes are implemented. Indeed, determining how well a control strategy is achieving the desired production or conservation outcomes is a vital com- ponent of developing a successful pest management programme (see Braysher 1993).
doi:10.1111/aec.12088
In this study, we explore the effects of removing invasive eastern gambusia Gambusia holbrooki has on sympatric fish assemblages in natural wetland habi- tats of Australia’s Murray–Darling Basin. Recent cor- relative analyses indicate that the impacts of eastern gambusia on wetland fishes may be largely dependent on the species life-history strategy (Macdonald et al. 2012). Specifically, the authors of this study suggested that eastern gambusia may have minimal negative impacts on more generalist wetland fishes, as their life history strategies permit niche segregation which lessens any adverse competitive or predatory pressures. We therefore hypothesized that the removal of eastern gambusia will reduce localized population growth of the invasive species but, any reductions will result in little influence on the population growth of more generalist sympatric wetland fish species. This was tested by integrating field-collected data from an experimental manipulation, with a predictive model- ling approach to compare population growth trajec- tories for eastern gambusia at ‘treatment’ sites where physical removal efforts took place and ‘control’ sites where no removal occurred. This allowed forecasts of how populations of sympatric generalist native and invasive fish species respond under differing scenarios of population growth in eastern gambusia. The value of monitoring and evaluating such ecological informa- tion for future management of established invasive fish species is also discussed.

xmethods
Model species
Eastern gambusia is a small bodied fish native to the south- east of the United States of America and Northern Mexico (Lloyd 1990). The species was introduced to Australia in 1925 as a biological control for mosquitoes – a programme which was spectacularly unsuccessful (see Lloyd 1990). It is a short lived species, with individuals dying in the same season in which they mature (Cadwallader & Backhouse 1983; Pen & Potter 1991). The species aggression, high reproductive potential, and broad environmental tolerances have contributed both to their success as an invader and to their potential for altering ecosystem processes (Lloyd 1990). The species is classified in the top eight ‘worst’ invasive fish taxa by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (Lowe et al. 2000) and has been implicated in declines of fishes (Howe et al. 1997; Caiola & de Sostoa 2005; Rowe et al. 2008), frogs (Webb & Joss 1997; Gillespie & Hero 1999; Komak & Crossland 2000), macroinver- tebrate, zooplankton and phytoplankton communities (Hurlbert et al. 1972; Margaritora et al. 2001; Angeler et al. 2007). However, there is little direct evidence that interspecific interactions between eastern gambusia and co-occurring native fish is detrimental; and that such effects manifest as significant negative impacts at population or species assemblage levels (e.g. Rowe et al. 2008; Ho et al. 2013) Experimental design and sampling
The study was undertaken over the spring – summer period of 2009/2010 (from late October/early November until late February) in off-channel wetlands located on the lower Ovens River floodplain, in south-eastern Australia (Fig. 1; see Tonkin et al. 2011 for further site description).This time period was selected for several reasons. First, it coincides with the known core reproductive period for the majority of fish species, including eastern gambusia, in the region (Humphries et al. 2002). Second, it encompasses the greatest extremes in the seasonal fluctuation of eastern gambusia densities for the region, including the most likely period of greatest impacts on sympatric biota, particularly in regard to aggression and direct predation on eggs and larvae (Macdonald et al. 2012). And third, after successive years of drought, the area experienced minor flooding during early spring 2009, filling floodplain habitats such as anabranches and billabongs which had been dry for several years. This facilitated immigration of both native and invasive fish species into these habitats.
A total of 13 sites were selected for the study on the basis that they were small in size (<1000 m2 in area); contained similar habitat (amount of aquatic vegetation and structural woody habitat); were mostly separated from the main river channel apart from during complete floodplain inunda- tion and; had a similar fish assemblage composition (based on previous surveys of the site or adjoining waterbodies (Macdonald et al. 2012)). Sites were allocated as either ‘treatment’ sites where physical removal efforts took place or ‘control’ sites where no removal occurred. Five of the 13 sites were allocated as ‘treatment’ sites and subjected to a variety of removal methods that exploit behavioural characteri- stics of eastern gambusia (see Tonkin et al. 2012). The primary and most efficient method used was targeted seine netting (7-m length; 1.5-m drop; 1-mm mesh diameter; 500-mm square purse), which involved focussing seining effort on observed individuals or schools of eastern gambusia. Up to 10 standard unbaited collapsible bait traps (45 × 25 × 25 cm, 3-mm mesh) and a single wing fyke net (5-m wing and 3-mm mesh), checked approximately every 12 h, were also used but were far less effective. These methods were undertaken over a 5–10-day period (effort was also recorded for application to control sites – see below) during each of four months (November–February). While small numbers of fish were removed (generally <20 mature fish per site), mark-recapture techniques revealed the approach resulted in major reductions in eastern gambusia abundances (generally over 40%), and eradication at two of the five sites after the first removal exercises in November (see Tonkin et al. 2012). The remaining eight sites were des- ignated as controls and had no eastern gambusia removed, but were still subjected to the removal exercise. However all fish were released back into the site after capture, to standardize any influence the physical activity of the removal methods may have had on the sympatric fish population.
Standardized surveys of the small-bodied fish commu- nity (including larval and juvenile stages of common carp Cyprinus carpio) were undertaken at each site during each of 4 months (November–February) in order to investigate the impacts of different abundances of eastern gambusia on sympatric fish populations and ultimately assess their popu- lation responses to removal efforts. During each month, fish were collected over a 2–5-day period, using a set of up to 10 collapsible bait traps and five replicate 20 s sweep net electrofishing (SNE) samples (King & Crook 2002). At the completion of each SNE sample and/or retrieval of each trap, all fish were placed immediately into a 300-L aerated bin where they were identified and counted before release. By the final trip in February, four sites had either dried completely, or had drawn down to extremely low levels. Any data that were collected during this period were excluded because of concerns of the compounding influence of adverse water quality.
Analysis
The analysis was based on survey data on the four most abundant fish species captured: eastern gambusia, carp gudgeon (Hypseleotris spp.; see Bertozzi et al. 2000), Austral- ian smelt (Retropinna semoni) and common carp (excluding adult cohorts). All other species were not included in analysis because of numerous missing values within the time series (given the absence or omission of data because of drying of sites) as well as low capture rates.
For each of the monthly sampling trips, catch data for both SNE and bait traps were expressed as the mean count of each species, averaged over both sampling methods. To estimate the trajectory of each species through time, we used a non-linear state-space modelling approach (SSM) to fit a mathematical model of population growth to the observed counts. In addition to the population growth rate, the SSM also included parameters that governed interac- tions between species.The SSM considers that the observed data arise from two distinct processes, the system process, that models the underlying biological process of population growth, and the observation process, that takes into account the error associated with the sampling process (King et al. 2010).
The underlying model we used for the system process to model population growth and species interactions was a discrete time stochastic Gompertz model (e.g. Dennis et al. 2006). Let Nt denote population abundance at time t. The system process equation is then given by:
Nt =Nt−1exp(a+blnNt−1 +Et) (1)
Where a and b are constants and E is the process error or stochastic variation around the true biological process. The process error E is assumed to be normally distributed with mean 0 and variance σ2. On a logarithmic scale, the Gompertz model is a linear autoregressive time series model of order 1.
Xt =Xt−1+a+bXt−1+Et (2)
Where Xt = ln(Nt), a represents the intrinsic rate of increase and b governs the strength of density-dependence. When b = 0 the model corresponds to one with no density- dependence (i.e. density independent growth).
However, the true (log) population abundances are not observed directly because of errors induced from the obser- vation or sampling process. Hence the observed counts Yt are given by the observation process:
Yt =Xt +Ut
Where Yt are the observed (log) abundance data and Ut is the random variability that results from the sampling process assumed to also be normally distributed with mean 0 and variance τ2. Hence the full SSM model is specified as:
(3)
Xt =Xt−1+a+bXt−1+Et Y=X+U
ttt Et ∼N(0,σ2)
Ut ∼N(0,τ2)
We can also generalize Eqn 3 to multiple species to estimate population growth of each species as well as interactions between species. If there are p interacting species, a multi- variate version of Eqn 3 is given by:
Xt =Xt−1 +A+BXt−1 +Et (4)
Where Xt is a vector of size p of (log) abundances of each species, A is a vector of growth rates, B is a p × p matrix whose elements bij give the effect of the abundance of species j on the per-capita growth rate of species i, and E is a vector of process errors (Ives et al. 2003).
A useful addition to Eqn 4 occurs when there are other covariates that could be used to model population growth. This is easily accommodated in the model by adding an additional term for covariate effects:
Xt =Xt−1 +A+BXt−1 +CZt +Et (5)
Where Zt is a vector of covariate values and C is a p × p matrix of the effects of covariate j on species i. For the present analysis, we had a single covariate describing whether Gambusia removal took place at a site or not.
Estimation of Eqn 4 is usually undertaken using maximum likelihood via either the EM (expectation maximization) or Kalman filter algorithm. Here we take a Bayesian approach and fit Eqn 4 using MCMC techniques constructed in the freely available program OpenBUGS (Lunn et al. 2009).
Initial attempts at fitting Eqn 5 ran into problems because of the short nature of each time series (4 observations) and the high number of missing observations (30% of observa- tions were missing in the eastern gambusia time series). As a result there was poor mixing of the chains and the model failed to converge.To remedy this we fit a simpler version of Eqn 5 that excluded all density-dependent terms and hence, assumed that each species was subject to exponential growth modified by potential interactions with other species. Hence, the density intradependent regulation terms in the model were set to 0.This was undertaken as the length of each time series related almost exclusively to the period of rapid popu- lation growth, hence, exponential growth models are reason- able approximations for these time series. It should also be pointed out that these water bodies are ephemeral and are recolonized by a new founder population each season. In addition to excluding within species density-dependent effects, we assumed that the only species interactions were the effects of eastern gambusia density on sympatric species and that the treatment effect (eastern gambusia removal) applied only to eastern gambusia population growth.
Parameter estimates for the fit of this simplified version of Eqn 5 were sampled from four chains following a burn-in of 10 000 samples, thereafter a further 40 000 samples were taken with a thinning rate of 10, leaving a sample of 4000 used to give the posterior distribution of each parameter. Convergence was assessed from the Gelman/Rubin diagnos- tic (Brooks & Gelman 1998) with a values less than 1.05 used as the criteria for convergence of the chains. 

xresults
A total of 14 700 fish were captured during the experi- ment, comprising five native and five invasive species. Eastern gambusia was the dominant species in terms of abundance, followed by carp gudgeon, common carp and Australian smelt (Table 1).
The removal approach coupled with control sites resulted in a range of eastern gambusia densities across sites and times. All sites contained very low numbers of eastern gambusia at the onset of the experiment (late October–early November), however the numbers of fish captured increased dramatically as the experi- ment progressed (Fig. 2a). A similar pattern was observed for carp gudgeon, while the numbers of both
Australian smelt and common carp captured remained relatively stable within sites throughout the duration of the study, owing to the project commencing shortly after the major spawning period of these species (Fig. 2). An assessment of population trajectories within the control sites indicated that the mean intrin- sic rate of population increase (a), was positive for eastern gambusia and carp gudgeon, while Australian smelt and common carp population change was rela- tively stable (Table 2). Eastern gambusia had by far the greatest rate of population increase (Fig. 3).
The intrinsic rate of increase of eastern gambusia populations was less within treatment sites when compared to control sites (Fig. 3). The value for the effect of the removal treatment (c) was negative indicating that the removal treatment resulted in a lower intrinsic rate of increase for eastern gambusia at removal sites (Table 2; Fig. 3). Hence, the population growth rate of eastern gambusia at control sites was estimated to be 0.837 and 0.137 at treatment sites (i.e. 0.837 − 0.700). We could not, however, detect a definitive effect of eastern gambusia removal on any of the sympatric species intrinsic rate of increase. While the parameter estimates for the effect of the removal treatment was positive for all three of the co-occurring species, the 95% credibility intervals for these estimates all overlapped zero, indicating a lack of evidence against the removals influencing the intrinsic rate of increase for any of the other species (Table 2; Fig. 3).
Like the assessment of the effect of removal, we could not detect a definitive effect of eastern gambusia on the per capita rate of population increase for any of the sympatric species.The parameter estimates for the effect of the interaction coefficients b, were all nega- tive, however the 95% credibility intervals for these estimates all overlapped zero indicating some degree of uncertainty (Table 2; Fig. 4).The parameter estimates for the effect of the interaction coefficients increased with increasing abundance of eastern gambusia (Fig. 4); however, values were very low, even when eastern gambusia abundances were extremely high. Again, the 95% credibility intervals for these estimates all overlapped zero, indicating a lack of evidence of varying abundances of eastern gambusia influencing the intrinsic rate of increase for any of the other species (Table 2).

xdiscussion
Robust evaluation of the outcomes of pest manage- ment programmes remains rare in the field of inva- sion biology. By integrating empirical information and a predictive modelling approach, this study has directly quantified the effectiveness of control actions for a widespread, established invasive fish, eastern gambusia. Although extremes in environmental variables limit our inference to some extent, the experiment provided important information on eastern gambusia population dynamics, removal effec- tiveness and fish assemblage responses following removal; information which is vital to the development of an effective pest management programme.
Eastern gambusia displayed a strong capacity to rapidly colonize habitats, typifying its success as an invasive species across the world. The state-space modelling approach used here demonstrated an extreme intrinsic rate of population increase, support- ing the general view that a small founder popula- tion (or even a single gravid female) can produce a very large population over the course of a few months (Pyke 2005; Rowe et al. 2008). This is not surprising given the species generally has several broods in a single breeding season, a gestation period usually around 22–25 days and maturation at around 4–6 weeks of age (Milton & Arthington 1983; Pyke 2005; Rowe et al. 2008). While not accounting for factors such as predation and resource availability, Maglio and Rosen (1969) calculated that 10 adult females could produce a population of five million individuals in a 6-month period, such is the reproductive poten- tial of the species. Although we did not observe such extreme trajectories, our study shows that extremely fast population growth can still be achieved under natural conditions where factors such as competition,
 predation and resource limitation may play important roles.
The results of the experiment indicate that the intrinsic rate of increase of eastern gambusia was far higher than the most common native species in the sampled habitats. This rapid population growth is likely to be a key factor in the species ability to estab- lish new populations, particularly in addition to their broad diet (Arthington & Marshall 1999) and extreme tolerance of poor water quality (Arthington et al. 1983; Kennard et al. 2005). Wide environmental tolerances, short generation times, rapid growth, broad diet, early sexual maturity and a high reproductive capacity have all been identified as being important attributes of successful invasive fish species (Koehn 2007). These biological attributes of eastern gambusia also appear to give them a competitive edge over co-occurring species in the wake of disturbances, such as extreme wetting and drying cycles in wetlands (e.g. altered flow regimes or extreme drought). We found that similar abundances of adult eastern gambusia and native species had recolonized wetlands following re-wetting (in the wake of an extreme drought across south- eastern Australia), yet eastern gambusia quickly became the numerically dominant fish species. Ho et al. (2013) recently documented relative abundances of eastern gambusia and carp gudgeon in Ovens River wetlands, concluding that regular seasonal flooding favoured the native species as opposed to extreme drying events where eastern gambusia dominated.This
pattern is also evident in many urban systems that have suffered substantial habitat alteration and water pollution (Arthington et al. 1983). Nevertheless, systems such as arid zone rivers where such extremes are an established part of the natural flow regime are likely to be an exception (e.g. Costelloe et al. 2010).
One of the most encouraging outcomes of the study was our finding that reductions of eastern gambusia may be an effective localized strategy to suppress eastern gambusia densities. Our modelling indicated that physical removal substantially reduced the rate of population increase over the study period. Such an approach has rarely been considered a viable manage- ment tool, with most efforts to date focussing instead on local eradication via drying of habitat or chemical poisoning (Macdonald & Tonkin 2008). Lydeard and Belk (1993) suggested that eastern gambusia presence, and not abundance, is the most important factor governing impacts on native fish fauna thus, the rationale for attempting local eradication as opposed to reductions. While the effectiveness of complete eradication cannot be questioned, we believe that, in situations where repeated recolonization is likely, reductions of eastern gambusia densities at a localized scale may be an effective strategy for minimizing their ecological impact. Suppression of eastern gambusia populations, as demonstrated here, is likely to persist for little longer than the duration of the season in which control actions are undertaken. Nevertheless, ongoing physical removal may be the best option until further advances are made on more wide-ranging solutions (e.g. autocidal genetic technology; Thresher 2008). Recent work has recognized the need for alter- native management strategies for eastern gambusia; for example the development of trapping and netting techniques to exploit specific behavioural responses of eastern gambusia which maximize the efficiency as a removal tool while minimizing their impact on non-target biota (e.g. Brookhouse & Coughran 2010; David Maynard unpubl. data, 2008). How effective these techniques are in reducing overall population sizes and if any such reduction will enhance conserva- tion objectives when applied in the field is a key ques- tion still to be investigated.
As hypothesized, we could not detect an impact of eastern gambusia on the short term intrinsic rate of population increase for on any of the three co- occurring species (or subsequent response of these species to the removal programme) despite the reduc- tions in abundances across sites and times. This may be because of the limitations regarding the short duration of the study, the number of sites and species used, or simply, that the effect of eastern gambusia on the three species examined is at least in the short term, minimal. While there is some suggestion of a negative interaction between eastern gambusia and all three sympatric species (with this negative impact increasing with increasing abundances of eastern gambusia), the value of the negative interaction coef- ficients were all extremely low. These results provide quantitative, field-based support for recent correlative analyses conducted in the same region (Macdonald et al. 2012) whereby, the direction and level of impact of eastern gambusia on these species was highly variable, and dependent on both biotic and environ- mental forces. It is possible that flexible life-history strategies and behaviours that promote niche- segregation may buffer some generalist native and invasive species (like those examined here) from severe negative impacts, allowing co-existence with eastern gambusia (Stoffels & Humphries 2003; Ling 2004; Macdonald et al. 2012). This also suggests that more specialist species that display more sub- stantial overlap in dietary- and habitat-niches with eastern gambusia (see Macdonald & Tonkin 2008; Macdonald et al. 2012) may be more susceptible to eastern gambusia impacts and thus more likely to respond to control efforts. Indeed, the absence or extremely low abundances of such specialist species (e.g. southern pygmy perch) captured during this study may support this. The inability to detect any such influence of eastern gambusia on the sympatric species used in this study may also be because of the short time frame over which the study was run. Our results illustrate that populations of the small bodied native species were dominated by the new recruits, thus any direct reductions in population sizes by way of eastern gambusia predation (e.g. Meffe 1985; Lloyd et al. 1986; Ivantsoff & Aarn 1999) or aggres- sion (Laha & Mattingly 2007) on the early life stages of these species should be able to be detected. Nevertheless, less direct implications such as reduced condition including stunted growth and low fecundity (Howe et al. 1997; Mills et al. 2004) may take expo- sure over several seasons and generations before their impacts can be detected at a population level. Further field studies conducted over several seasons as well as assessing the response of more specialist species fol- lowing eastern gambusia removal are required to test these predictions.
It has also been suggested that largely natural systems, which contain a diverse array of microhabitat niches, and naturally variable flow regimes may afford some resistance to the proliferation or impacts of inva- sive fishes (e.g. Morgan et al. 2004; Costelloe et al. 2010; Ho et al. 2013). The current study was con- ducted in a largely intact floodplain wetland system with only very minor flow alterations, and is subject to a winter–spring seasonal flooding regime and therefore connection to adjoining habitats (Tonkin et al. 2011). This allows both immigration and emigration of fish, and therefore possible relief from high densities of eastern gambusia. The lack of evidence of any impact of eastern gambusia on the common generalist species may therefore be in part a reflection of the health and/or productivity of the system, allowing these fishes to reduce resource overlap and competitive interactions. This could suggest that the impacts of eastern gambusia are likely to be exacerbated in more degraded sites. From a management perspective, mini- mizing any impact of eastern gambusia on common generalist species may be achieved through wider res- toration actions, such as the introduction of woody debris, restoring natural flow regimes and the reha- bilitation of riparian vegetation (e.g. Harris 1996; Kennard et al. 2005). Such approaches may simulta- neously benefit other native species with more special- ized habitat requirements (e.g. southern pygmy perch, Tonkin et al. 2008).
In summary, this study has demonstrated that control programmes targeted at established invasive fish populations can be an effective control measure, although the flow-on ecological benefits may be hard to detect. The results generated in the study do require further investigation, particularly in relation to responses by more specialist wetland species (includ- ing any adverse impacts of by-catch during removal exercises). Nevertheless, the study approach provides an example of the value of using empirical data to inform the effective management of established aquatic pests.This information has the potential to be used to devise strategies that maximize the level of ecological improvement to native fish communities given a fixed budget (budget maximization), or mini- mize the cost of achieving a defined removal outcome (cost minimization) (e.g. Choquenot et al. 2004). Information on the benefits and costs of control actions is often either unreliable or unknown, yet without it, managers risk making inappropriate management decisions or not acting when it may be appropriate to do so (Braysher 1993). Given the importance of understanding the potential benefits of control options, the implementation of a robust moni- toring and evaluation component should always be considered during the development of pest manage- ment plans. This is particularly pertinent for estab- lished, aquatic invasive species for which there is little information on control effectiveness, popula- tion dynamics and/or ecosystem response to control actions.
