xabstract
We use data from inundated-area surveys of 58 coastal wetlands spanning a gradient of
anthropogenic impacts across all five Laurentian Great Lakes to describe the distribution of nine exotic
and invasive taxa of aquatic plants. We found plants that were exotic or have invasive strains to be substantially
more prevalent in wetlands in Lakes Erie and Ontario than in Lakes Superior and Huron, with
Lake Michigan wetlands intermediate. Najas minor (slender naiad), Butomus umbellatus (flowering
rush), and Hydrocharis morsus-ranae (European frogbit) were restricted to the lower lakes and rarely
dominant. Myriophyllum spicatum (Eurasian milfoil), Potamogeton crispus (curly pondweed), Lythrum
salicaria (purple loosestrife), Phalaris arundinacea (reed canary grass), Phragmites australis (common
reed), and Typha sp. (cattail) were more widespread and except for P. crispus, often among the dominant
taxa. None of the submerged or floating-leaf exotic taxa were associated with altered total plant cover or
richness, although M. spicatum, P. crispus, and native Stuckenia pectinatus (sago pondweed) were positively
associated with agricultural intensity in the watershed (a surrogate for nutrient loading). Emergent
P. australis, L. salicaria, and Typha were more likely to be present and dominant as agricultural intensity
increased, and were associated with elevated emergent cover and decreased emergent genera richness.
Effects of dominant taxa on plant cover and richness were readily detected using ordinal data from 100 m
inundated segments but were harder to discern with data aggregated to the wetland scale. The sum of
shoreline-wide abundance scores for four easily identified taxa (S. pectinata, P. australis, Typha, and L.
salicaria) is proposed as a rapidly-measured indicator of anthropogenic disturbance across the Great
Lakes.

xintroduction
Exotic and invasive species have been identified
as a major cause of ecosystem changes in the Laurentian
Great Lakes (Mills et al. 1993), as they are
in ecosystems in general (Mack et al. 2000). Extensive
commercial and recreational boat traffic in the
Great Lakes combined with widespread urban and
suburban development in surrounding watersheds
facilitate the introduction and spread of exotic
species (Mills et al. 1993). Exotic and invasive
plants are disproportionately common in wetlands
compared to terrestrial ecosystems (Sutherland
2004), especially in those disturbed by eutrophication,
sedimentation, and hydrologic alteration
(Zedler and Kercher 2004), and coastal wetlands of
the Great Lakes are no exception (Herrick and Wolf
2005). Adverse effects of exotic plants on wetlands
can include reduced flora richness, degradation of
faunal habitat (overly dense growth, reduced structural
diversity, loss of sediment microtopography),
decline in forage value (plants less desirable as
food for waterfowl, support fewer macro-invertebrates),
and alteration in ecosystem functions such
as nutrient cycling (Zedler and Kercher 2004).
Despite concerns about exotic and invasive
species in the Great Lakes and exotic and invasive
plants in wetlands in general, there is only scattered
published information on exotic/invasive plants in
coastal wetlands of the Great Lakes. Studies that focused
on broadly describing Great Lakes plant communities
(e.g., Keddy and Reznicek 1985, Smith et
al. 1991, Minc and Albert 1998) or evaluating vegetation
responses to anthropogenic disturbance (e.g.,
Lougheed et al. 2001, Wilcox et al. 2002, Albert
and Minc 2004, Rothrock and Simon 2007) did not
publish details on exotic taxa. A few studies have
specifically examined exotic and invasive plants in
Great Lakes wetlands (Wilcox et al. 2003, Herrick
and Wolf 2005) and some general floristic studies
include information on exotic/invasive taxa (e.g.,
Stuckey 1989, Klarer and Millie 1992, Knapton and
Petrie 1999, Stanley et al. 2005), but all of these
cover only a portion of the basin. Various state, federal,
and academic entities maintain Internet databases
on exotic and invasive plant occurrences but
the information is generally summarized at large
spatial scales (e.g., counties) and does not differentiate
coastal from inland waters.
Our study addressed this data gap by describing
the prevalence and distribution of exotic and invasive
aquatic plants in coastal wetlands across the
five Laurentian Great Lakes. We use “exotic/invasive”
to mean both entirely non-native species (i.e.,
Eurasian origin), and native species that have exotic
or invasive strains or hybrids. To aid in developing
exotic/invasive plant monitoring designs and in understanding
factors controlling their distribution,
we look for patterns related to biogeography, wetland
type, and a dominant anthropogenic stressor
(agricultural impacts). We also test whether we can
detect negative effects of exotic/invasive taxa on
plant community attributes (richness, total cover),
an impact often cited but which has recently been
questioned in the literature (e.g., Farnsworth and
Ellis 2001, Houlahan and Findlay 2004). Our sampling
is focused specifically on inundated areas that
support submerged, floating-leaf, and emergent
plant taxa.


xmethods
Study wetlands were distributed across the U.S.
side of all five Laurentian Great Lakes and across a
gradient of anthropogenic impacts using a sampling
design made possible by the work of the Great
Lakes Ecological Indicators Consortium (GLEI).
GLEI characterized agricultural intensity across the
basin by collecting publicly available spatial data
(primarily at the county or 8-digit HUC scale) describing
rates of fertilizer application and runoff of
nutrients, sediments, and agricultural chemicals;
summarizing them at the scale of the land area
draining coastal watersheds; and aggregating them
via principal components (details in Danz et al.
2005, Danz et al. 2007). The resulting aggregate
agricultural intensity metric (AgChemPC1) is a
unitless, land-use based surrogate for nutrient loading.
We selected wetlands to sample from along the
AgChemPC1 gradient within combinations of biogeographic
ecoprovince (Laurentian mixed forest—
LMF, or eastern broadleaf forest—EBF; Keys et al.
1995) and wetland hydromorphic type (riverine or
protected; Keough et al. 1999). Ecoprovince was
included as a design element to reflect climate and
surficial geology, while wetland type is a surrogate
for hydrologic factors such as water source and residence
time (Keough et al. 1999). We did not sample
fringing-type wetlands which are present only
in some parts of the basin, and did not balance our
design across lakes, but did sample at least six wetlands
per lake. We excluded wetlands that had no
surface hydrologic connection to the adjacent lake
(whether naturally or due to diking), whose shorelines
were dominated by woody rather than herbaceous
vegetation, or that were not publicly
accessible via a 15 foot shallow-draft motorboat.
We sampled 58 coastal wetlands along the U.S.
side of the Great Lakes over the summers of 2002,
2003, and 2004 (Table 1, Fig. 1). All wetlands were
sampled with a 1-day visit during peak growing
season (July or August, more southern sites sampled
earliest). Over-all sampling goals were to measure
1) condition of wetland water quality and
habitat structure (e.g., vegetation) across the anthropogenic
impact gradient, 2) responses of biota
(fish, algae, food web) to changes in water quality
and habitat structure, and 3) the influence of hydrologic
and biogeographic factors on these relationships.
Sampling protocols were based on pilot
studies that established the amount and sequence of
data collection that could be accomplished by a
five-person, two-boat crew in 1 day per site. This
paper focuses on data for aquatic plants.
Prior to site visits, we established seven target
sampling stations per wetland, spaced at equal intervals
along the shoreline as digitized from USGS
orthophotographs. Sampling locations were ad
justed in the field as needed to accommodate altered
wetland morphology, and the number of stations
was reduced (from nominally 7 to 6 or 5) if
the wetland was small or morphologically simple.
Plant sampling focused on rapidly characterizing
cover and composition along relatively large (100
m) stretches of shoreline centered on each sampling
station. For each such 100 m “inundated segment,”
we assigned a score for total emergent cover, total
floating-leaf cover, and total submerged cover. We
also noted the dominant emergent, floating-leaf,
and submerged taxa and recorded all macrophytes
(vascular plants and Characeae) seen growing in the
water (even if they were ordinarily mud-flat or wetmeadow
inhabitants). Cover scores and taxa lists
were based on the full extent of each plant zone in
the 100 m inundated segment; i.e., out to the emergent
plant edge for emergent cover and composition,
and so on (a rake was used to retrieve
submerged plants for inspection as needed). Obtaining
these data took us approximately 20 minutes per
inundated segment, and we covered the area by a
combination of wading and poling or motoring our
boat along.
We used “dominant” to mean the taxa appearing
to have the highest cover or biomass over the inundated
segment (often a single taxon, but we
recorded up to four co-dominants if all seemed
equally abundant). A 0 to 4 point scale was used to
score total cover in each plant zone according to the
following criteria: 0 = no plants present; 1 = only a
few plants present (< 10% cover); 2 = at least twice
as much open space as plants (10–33% cover); 3 =
similar amounts of plants and open space (33–66%
cover), and 4 = at least twice as many plants as
open space (> 66% cover). The comparison of
plants to open space was made on the basis of water
surface area for floating-leaf plants, water volume
for submerged plants, and air volume for emergent
plants. All cover scores were assigned by one of the
same three researchers who inter-calibrated their
ratings on a regular basis.
In an attempt to develop a rapid plant-based indicator
of wetland condition, we also recorded a
“shoreline-wide” score describing the prevalence of
four taxa (Phragmites australis, Lythrum salicaria,
Typha sp., and Stuckenia pectinata), selected based
on their tendency to reach high density, be identifiable
from some distance, and potentially be of some
management concern. Stuckenia pectinata is not exotic
nor ordinarily considered a nuisance species,
but was included because of its affinity for high-nutrient
conditions (Davis and Brinson 1980,
Lougheed et al. 2001, Albert and Minc 2004). We
assigned one of four ordinal categories (0 = not present,
1 = scattered individuals, 2 = common part of
mixed plant assemblage, or 3 = appearing to be
dominant) to each taxon based on their apparent
prevalence across all of the wetland visible from a
boat (i.e., wet meadow as well as inundated areas).
These scores were independent of the more detailed
observations made in inundated segments.
We identified plants to species or genus, depending
on the level possible using macroscopic plant
characteristics readily apparent in the field. With a
few exceptions (e.g., Characeae), identifications for
floating-leaf and submerged taxa were to species.
Identifications for many emergent taxa were only to
genus (e.g., Carex, Iris, Sagittaria, Sparganium) because
they were no longer flowering in July and
August and because our intent of rapidly characterizing
plants over large spatial areas precluded the
close inspection that would be necessary to distinguish
among some species. With the exception of
Typha, exotic/invasive taxa were identified to
species, but we did not distinguish among invasive
and non-invasive strains within species. Identities
of Myriophyllum species were confirmed with
voucher specimens, although we did not routinely
voucher other taxa. Data are analyzed as exotic
Myriophyllum spicatum versus the four native
species (M. farwelli, M. heterophyllum, M. sibiricum,
M. verticillatum) combined, because M. verticillatum
and M. heterophyllum could only be
reliably distinguished when in flower but M. spicatum
could be distinguished from the others by various
vegetative characteristics (Fassett 1957,
Gleason and Cronquist 1991, Crow and Hellquist
2000, Chadde 2002).
Analyses of plant cover and composition were
made at two spatial scales; the 100 m inundated
segments themselves and the wetland aggregate
scale. Cover data were aggregated by averaging
across inundated segments. Taxa occurrence and
dominance were described at the wetland scale by
the percent of inundated segments at which each
was present and the percent of segments at which
each was dominant when it was present. Taxa lists
were used to compute submerged and floating-leaf
genus richness, emergent genus richness, and richness
of exotic/invasive taxa for each inundated segment
and each wetland. Submerged and floatingleaf
taxa were combined for richness calculations to
avoid double-counting species having both types of
leaves. In computing emergent richness, we excluded
taxa that ordinarily grow in mud flats and
wet meadows but not in standing water (as per
Chadde 2002), assuming they were “accidentals” in
our survey of inundated areas.
Relationships of the plant variables to the experimental
design factors were assessed using data aggregated
to the wetland-scale. Linear regression
was used to examine relationships between the
AgChemPC1 stressor gradient and richness of exotic
taxa, percent of inundated segments where individual
taxa were present or dominant when
present, and shoreline-wide scores for P. australis,
L. salicaria, Typha, and S. pectinata. The influence
of wetland morphology (riverine or protected) and
ecoprovince (LMF or EBF) on these same plant
variables was assessed by two-factor ANOVA.
Associations of individual plant taxa with total
cover and genera richness were assessed at both the
whole-wetland and the inundated segment scale.
The percent of wetland segments where individual
taxa were present or dominant when present were
related to wetland-scale richness and average cover
for the corresponding growth zone via Bonferroni
corrected Pearson correlation. Taxa were related to
segment-scale richness and total cover for their
growth zone by comparing groups of segments
where the taxa were absent, present but not dominant,
or dominant via box-plots notched at 95%
confidence intervals around the medians (if notches
do not overlap one can be 95% confident that the
medians are different; McGill et al. 1978).
In order to evaluate whether exotic/invasive
plants exhibit patterns of commonness and dominance
or relationships to total cover and richness
that differ from native plants, the above analyses
were conducted for selected native taxa as well as
for all exotic/invasive taxa. Closely-related natives
selected for comparisons were Myriophyllum sp.
(for comparison to M. spicatum), Najas flexilis (for
N. minor), Potamogeton richardsonii (for P.
crispus), Glyceria (same family as P. arundinacea
and P. australis), and Decodon verticillatus (same
family as L. salicaria). We found no other plants in
the same family as Butomus umbellatus or Typha,
and no floating-leaf plants in the same family as
Hydrocharis morsus-ranae. Native taxa selected because
they were the most common examples of
their growth forms were Nuphar variegata (floating-
leaf) and Sagittaria and Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani
(broad-leaf and graminoid emergents,
respectively). Potamogeton richardsonii (already
mentioned vis-a-vis P. crispus) was the most common
native submergent but we also analyzed native
S. pectinata (third most common) due to our interest
in it as an indicator species.

xresults
Our mid- to late-summer vegetation surveys of
inundated areas in 58 Great Lakes coastal wetlands
recorded a total of 80 taxa emerging from the water,
10 floating-leaf taxa, 9 taxa that form both submerged
and floating leaves, and 35 submerged taxa.
Thirty-nine of the taxa occasionally found “emerging”
from shallow water are ordinarily wet meadow
or mud flat inhabitants (Chadde 2002). We found
nine aquatic plant taxa that are exotic or invasive in
the Great Lakes (Table 1, Table 2). The Eurasian
exotics found were Butomus umbellatus (flowering
rush), Hydrocharis morsus-ranae (European frogbit),
Lythrum salicaria (purple loosestrife), Myriophyllum
spicatum (Eurasian milfoil), Najas minor
(slender naiad), and Potamogeton crispus (curly
pondweed). The invasive taxa found were Phalaris
arundinacea (reed canary grass), Phragmites australis
(common reed), and Typha (cattail). Phalaris
arundinacea and P. australis are native to North
America but have rapidly spreading invasive strains
(Galatowitsch et al. 1999, Lavoie et al. 2003,
Zedler and Kercher 2004), while exotic Typha angustifolia
has widely hybridized with native T. latifolia
to produce invasive T. ´ glauca (Herrick and
Wolf 2005, Zedler and Kercher 2004). We also
noted exotic Iris pseudoacorus (yellow flag iris) in
flower at several Lake Ontario wetlands during an
early summer reconnaissance trip, but did not distinguish
among the no longer flowering I. pseudoacorus
and native I. versicolor (blue flag iris) in our
actual surveys and cannot comment further on its
distribution.
There were three exotics among the submerged
growth-forms. Exotic Najas minor was found only
in Lakes Erie and Ontario, occurred at only about
one-third of inundated segments within those wetlands,
and was rarely dominant (Tables 2 and 3). In
contrast, native congener N. flexilis occurred in all
five lakes and over half of wetlands and inundated
segments within wetlands, and was often a dominant
(Table 3). Exotic P. crispus was found in all
lakes except Superior and was fairly common but
only rarely dominant (Tables 2, 3). Native P.
richardsonii (the most common Potamogeton) was
much more likely to occur and be dominant than
was P. crispus (Table 3). Exotic M. spicatum was
found in all five lakes (Table 2), and was more
common and likely to dominate than any one native
Myriophyllum species but slightly less so than all
native Myriophyllum combined (Table 3). Myriophyllum
spicatum was the most common exotic
among the submerged taxa, but ten native taxa, including
P. richardsonii, N. flexilis, and Stuckenia
pectinata, had higher occurrence frequencies across
wetlands.
The one exotic floating-leaf species, Hydrocharis
morsus-ranae, was found only in Lake Ontario
(Table 2). There were no native floating-leaf plants
in the same family to compare it to. Within Lake
Ontario, H. morsus-ranae had an occurrence frequency
similar to that of Nuphar variegata – the
most common floating-leaf species basin-wide
(Table 3). We only found H. morsus-ranae growing
among emergent plants quite close to shore while
other floating-leaf taxa grew over a much wider
depth range, which is why we did not often designate
H. morsus-ranae a dominant (Table 3) even
though its cover could be locally high.
Emergent exotic B. umbellatus was found only in
Lakes Erie and Ontario, where it occurred at about
one-third of inundated segments but was never a
dominant (Tables 2, 3). The other four exotic/invasive
emergents were much more common and
widely distributed (Table 2). Typha was found at
over 90% of wetlands and two-thirds of inundated
segments, while L. salicaria, P. arundinacea, and P.
australis were each found at roughly half of wetlands
and inundated segments within those wetlands
(Table 3). Typha was the second most
common emergent taxon after Sagittaria (Sparganium
and Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani were
tied for third place) and was more likely to be dominant
when present than any other taxon. Lythrum
salicaria was more common than native Decodon
verticillatus from the same family (7’th vs. 17’th
most common among emergents overall) but neither
was dominant very often (Table 3). Both P. arundinacea
and P. australis were more common than native
family member Glyceria (4’th and 8’th ranked,
vs. 9’th for Glyceria), but only P. australis was
often dominant when present (Table 3). Lythrum
salicaria and P. australis were somewhat more
common across wetlands as a whole (i.e., including
wet meadows) than their prevalence in standing
water suggested (52 and 66% of wetlands respectively
based on shoreline-wide scores versus 40%
and 41% based on inundated segment data).
The number of exotic/invasive plant taxa per
wetland differed substantially among lakes. All
wetlands in Lakes Erie and Ontario had at least
three such taxa and some as many as eight, while
wetlands in Lakes Superior or Huron had at most
four (Table 1). Richness of exotic/invasive taxa was
significantly higher (ANOVA, p < 0.001) in the
EBF ecoprovince (Lakes Ontario, Erie, and southern
Lake Michigan) than in the LMF ecoprovince
(Lakes Superior, Huron, and northern Lake Michigan).
There was no significant difference among
riverine and protected wetlands in exotic/invasive
richness (ANOVA). There was also no difference
due to wetland inundated area (linear regression),
although other studies (e.g., Albert et al. 2007)
have noted higher richness of exotic taxa in larger
wetlands.
The number of exotic/invasive taxa increased
with increasing levels of agricultural intensity (linear
regression, p < .001, Fig. 2). Removing an outlier
wetland (Grand Mere, no exotics despite fairly
high AgChemPC1) increased the strength of the relationship
between exotic/invasive richness and
AgChemPC1 considerably (Fig. 2). Grand Mere is a
small, protected wetland located within a natural
area (Indiana Dunes State Park) but embedded in a
larger landscape having high levels of agriculture
and urbanization. Its immediate watershed is apparently
poorly represented by land-use data at the
county and 8-digit HUC scale.
The AgChemPC1 stressor gradient was a signifi-
cant predictor of percent occurrence and dominance
in inundated segments for many taxa. Exotic/invasive
M. spicatum, P. crispus, L. salicaria, P. australis,
and Typha were all more frequently present
with increasing levels of AgChemPC1, as was native
S. pectinata, while other native taxa (Myriophyllum
sp., N. flexilis, P. richardsonii, N.
variegata, Glyceria) were less frequently present
with increasing AgChemPC1 (Table 4). Both P.
australis and Typha were dominant more often with
increasing AgChemPC1, while N. variegata was
dominant less often as AgChemPC1 increased
(Table 5). Tables 4 and 5 report significant linear
regressions, but the relationship of some taxa to
AgChemPC1 may be even better described as
threshold-like (e.g., Typha, Fig. 3).
The frequency with which particular taxa were
present or dominant was also often related to ecoprovince.
Exotic P. crispus and L. salicaria and native
S. pectinata were more often present in the
EBF than the LMF ecoprovince, while the reverse
was true for native P. richardsonii, N. variegata,
Glyceria, Sagittaria, and S. tabernaemontani
(ANOVA, Table 4). Typha was more frequently
dominant and Sagittaria less frequently dominant in
the EBF than the LMF ecoprovince (ANOVA,
Table 5).
Wetland type was unimportant in explaining occurrence
and dominance patterns for most taxa.
However, L. salicaria and P. crispus were more
often present and S. pectinata was more often present
and dominant in riverine wetlands while native
Myriophyllum was more often dominant in protected
wetlands (Tables 4, 5).
When we examined data aggregated to the wetland
scale, there were not many significant relationships
between taxon prevalence or dominance and
vegetation richness or cover, and all such relationships
were positive. There were no significant
(Bonferroni corrected p 0.05) correlations at the
wetland scale between the frequency with which
any of the taxa tested was dominant and either genera
richness or average cover in its growth zone.
There were also no significant correlations between
presence frequency of any emergents and emergent
cover, although there were positive correlations between
P. arundinacea and Glyceria presence and
emergent richness. The presence frequencies of a
few submerged/floating taxa were positively correlated
to submerged/floating richness or cover at the
wetland scale (native Myriophyllum sp., N. variegata,
N. flexilis, and H. morsus-ranae).
In contrast, at the inundated-segment scale, significant
relationships between taxon presence or
dominance and vegetation richness and cover were
common and both positive and negative in nature.
Most taxa were more likely to be present in inundated
segments having higher genera richness
(Table 6), although two relatively uncommon taxa
(N. minor and D. verticillatus) had no association to
richness. Lythrum salicaria stood out as the only
taxon whose presence was associated with reduced
richness (Table 6, Fig. 4). There were no taxa
whose dominance was associated with increased
genera richness, but several taxa whose dominance
was associated with decreased genera richness.
Richness was lower in inundated segments where
N. flexilis, P. richardsonii, Glyceria, Typha, or
Sagittaria were dominant than where they were just
present, and richness was lower where S. pectinata
or P. australis were dominant than where they were
either present or absent (Table 6, Fig. 4).
Submerged and floating-leaf taxa generally differed
from emergent taxa in their relationship to
cover. Most floating-leaf and submerged taxa were
more likely to be present in inundated segments
where submerged or floating cover was higher
(Table 6). In contrast, emergent cover did not differ
among segments where emergent taxa were present
versus absent (Table 6), except for the two least
common species examined (B. umbellatus and D.
verticillatus). Altered cover in association with
dominance were not found for any of the submerged
or floating-leaf exotics, but did exist for
some native taxa (P. richardsonii, S. pectinata, N.
variegata; Table 6, Fig. 4). In contrast, there were
differences in cover in association with dominance
by several of the emergent exotic/invasive taxa
(i.e., L. salicaria, P. arundinacea, P. australis), as
well as for native Glyceria. Cover tended to increase
in association with dominance by emergents
but decrease in association with dominance by submerged
and floating-leaf taxa (Table 6).
Shoreline-wide scores for the four taxa for which
these were recorded were all positively related to
the agricultural intensity gradient. The correlation
was strongest for S. pectinata (r = 0.64), followed
by P. australis (r = 0.49), Typha (r = 0.40), and L.
salicaria (r = 0.32). A stepwise multiple regression
with AgChemPC1 as the dependent variable and
taxon-specific scores as independent variables retained
all four taxa. The correlation with
AgChemPC1 for shoreline-wide scores of all four
taxa summed was 0.75 (Fig. 5), and the correlation
for just the three emergent taxa was 0.63. The
summed score for the four taxa was significantly
higher in the EBF than the LMF ecoprovince
(ANOVA p < 0.001) but did not differ among wetland
types.


xdiscussion
All of the exotic and invasive plant taxa we
found (Butomus umbellatus, Hydrocharis morsusranae,
Lythrum salicaria, Myriophyllum spicatum,
Najas minor, Phragmites australis, Phalaris arundinacea,
Potamogeton crispus, and Typha) were
known to be present in the Great Lakes. However
our sampling effort, which assessed vegetation over
broad inundated areas within both riverine and protected
type wetlands, provides details on their occurrence
patterns for which there is little published
information. There are, of course, many more
coastal wetlands than the 58 we sampled, but we
did cover all five lakes using an experimental design
that spanned a major anthropogenic gradient,
so our results provide a spatially comprehensive estimate
of exotic/invasive aquatic plant prevalence
across the basin.
We found M. spicatum, P. australis, P. arundinacea,
and Typha basin-wide, but found H. morsusranae,
L. salicaria, N. minor, P. crispus, and
B. umbellatus only in some subset of the five Great
Lakes. Hydrocharis morsus-ranae had until recently
been restricted to Lake Ontario (the only
lake where we found it), but is now also reported in
Lake St. Clair (NAS database—http://nas.er.usgs
.gov/) suggesting it may soon spread to Lake Erie.
We did not find L. salicaria in Lake Huron where
others have documented its presence, but primarily
in diked wetlands (Herrick and Wolf 2005, Stanley
et al. 2005) which we did not sample. We found N.
minor only in Lakes Erie and Ontario, consistent
with the APIS database (http://el.erdc.usace.army
.mil/ aqua/apis). We may have missed finding
P. crispus in Lake Superior because of phenology
(we sampled these wetlands latest in summer and P.
crispus begins to senescence in June; Nichols and
Shaw 1986), but herbarium databases for Wisconsin
(http://wisplants.uwsp.edu/) and Michigan
(http://herbarium.lsa.umich.edu/) also do not report
P. crispus in counties bordering Lake Superior.
1970s era maps (reproduced in Herdendorf 1987)
show B. umbellatus to be more widespread in Lake
Erie than our data, and our rapid-survey method
may have underestimated its prevalence because of
its similarity to a bulrush (Schoenoplectus sp.)
when not in flower. However the frequency with
which we found B. umbellatus in Lakes Erie and
Ontario (at about one-third of wetlands and inundated
segments within those wetlands) is consistent
with frequencies recently reported by Lavoie et al.
(2003) for the upper St. Lawrence River.
Our sampling design distributed wetlands along
an agricultural intensity gradient as a surrogate for
nutrient loading, and AgChemPC1 is indeed well
correlated with wetland ambient nutrient levels
(Trebitz et al. 2007). Exotic/invasive L. salicaria, P.
arundinacea, P. australis, Typha, M. spicatum, and
P. crispus and native S. pectinata are all reportedly
favored (greater cover, biomass, competitive ability,
etc.) by elevated nutrient levels (e.g., Davis and
Brinson 1980, Gaudet and Keddy 1995, Galatowitsch
et al. 1999, Lougheed et al. 2001, Drexler and
Bedford 2002, Albert and Minc 2004, Zedler and
Kercher 2004). Consistent with this literature, we
found all of these taxa except P. arundinacea to increase
their frequency of presence or dominance
with increasing AgChemPC1. In contrast, several
native taxa including Glyceria, N. variegata, P.
richardsonii, N. flexilis, and native Myriophyllum
were less often present or dominant with increasing
AgChemPC1. However none of the taxa we examined
occurred exclusively in wetlands with high
AgChemPC1 scores nor were any taxa absent from
all high AgChemPC1 wetlands, confirming observations
by Lougheed et al. (2001) and Davis and
Brinson (1980) that plants on both ends of the nutrient
and disturbance-tolerance spectrum persist
across a range of wetland conditions. The sharp increase
in dominance rates of Typha above
AgChemPC1 scores of 1.0 (Fig. 3) may reflect a
transition from T. latifolia to the more invasive
T. angustifolia and T. ´ glauca.
We included ecoprovince as a sampling design
element as a surrogate for biogeography, but this is
not independent of AgChemPC1, since climate and
soils are more favorable for agriculture in the lower
than the upper Great Lakes. Levels of agricultural
intensity are generally higher in the EMF than the
LMF ecoprovince, and not surprisingly, positive exotic/
invasive taxon responses to AgChemPC1 were
often associated with more frequent occurrence in
the EBF ecoprovince (Table 4). The strong spatial
component of stressor patterns in the basin (Danz et
al. 2007), combined with the fact that most exotic
aquatic plants were first found in Lakes Ontario or
Erie (Mills et al. 1993), complicates determining if
the generally higher prevalence of exotic/invasive
taxa in the lower lakes is due to stronger introduction
vectors, more favorable environmental conditions
(e.g., warmer water), or an affinity for higher
levels of nutrients and disturbance. However some
taxa in our study (M. spicatum, P. australis, and
Typha) increased their prevalence with increasing
AgChemPC1 score without being significantly associated
with any ecoprovince. Analyzing the frequency
of dominance given presence avoids range
effects, and also gave positive associations with
AgChemPC1 for P. australis and Typha.
Previous studies have found invasive wetland
plants to be more common and dominant in systems
that naturally have less intense water level fluctuations
(non-tidal vs. tidal freshwater wetlands;
Lavoie et al. 2003) and in systems where diking has
disrupted normal water level fluctuations (Herrick
and Wolf 2005, Wilcox and Whillians 1999). We
did not sample diked wetlands, but evaluated wet-
land type as a surrogate for aspects of hydrology
such as water source, wave versus flood disturbance,
and flushing rates that are known to influence
biota and water chemistry (e.g., Burton 1985,
Minc and Albert 1998, Keough et al. 1999). We
found that simple distinction among riverine versus
protected wetlands was unimportant as a predictor
for most plant taxa. Riverine wetlands were more
likely than protected wetlands to support P. crispus
and L. salicaria, but this may reflect introduction
vectors (human habitation and recreation) more
than hydrology per se.
Analysis of relationships between plant richness
or total cover and presence or dominance by individual
taxa revealed several important themes. One
theme was that not all exotic taxa had negative impacts,
and that comparisons to common native taxa
provided useful perspective. A second was that
there appeared to be systematic differences among
patterns of emergent vegetation compared to submerged
and floating-leaf vegetation. A third was
that the whole-wetland scale did not reliably identify
taxonomic interactions, while the inundatedsegment
scale did so effectively.
There is strong evidence in the literature for negative
impacts on other vegetation from emergent
exotic/invasive Typha, P. australis, and P. arundinacea
(Gaudet and Keddy 1995, Galatowitsch et al.
1999, Green and Galatowitsch 2002, Lavoie et al.
2003, Zedler and Kercher 2004), and also from L.
salicaria (Blossey et al. 2001, Morrison 2002; but
see Farnsworth and Ellis 2001, Hager and Vinebrooke
2004). Consistent with this literature, we
found dominance by these taxa to be associated
with elevated emergent cover and reduced emergent
genera richness, making them monotype dominants
in the Frieswyk (2005) scheme. Typha, P. australis,
P. arundinacea, and L. salicaria were also common
enough that negative impacts due to their dominance
could be widespread. In contrast, Lavoie et
al. (2003) found little evidence for reduced plant
richness with dominance by B. umbellatus in St.
Lawrence River wetlands, and we never found B.
umbellatus dominant at all, even though this
species is considered a nuisance in its native Eurasia
(Hroudova et al. 1996).
There is little published information concerning
effects of submerged exotics in wetlands. P. crispus
and M. spicatum are considered nuisance species in
shallow lakes, but reductions in their abundance
over time from nuisance levels (monotype dominance)
to coexistence with other taxa (matrix dominance
in the Frieswyk 2005 scheme) have often
been noted (Nichols 1994, Galatowitsch et al.
1999). Our inundated-segment data suggests that M.
spicatum currently operates as a matrix dominant in
the Great Lakes (no negative impacts on richness or
cover), and we found very few cases of dominance
by P. crispus or N. minor at all.
Taxonomically related or common native taxa
provided a useful benchmark for judging the status
of exotic/invasive species. For submerged taxa, the
fact that we were able to detect richness and cover
differences in association with dominance by some
natives reassured us that finding no such effects for
exotic taxa was not because we lacked power to detect
them. In the case of emergent taxa, we also
found genera richness decreases in association with
dominance by some natives that are not considered
invasive (e.g., Glyceria, Sagittaria), in accord with
similar findings by Houlahan and Findlay (2004).
These comparisons remind us that the degree of impacts
matter; effects of invasive/exotic emergents
on richness and cover were larger in magnitude (in
box plots) than for common native taxa.
Examining patterns for native as well as
exotic/invasive taxa also revealed systematic differences
between submerged/floating-leaf and emergent
plants in patterns of richness and total cover.
Most submerged and floating-leaf taxa were more
likely to be present at segments having higher richness
and total cover; low richness and cover characterized
areas where wave and current exposure or
poor water clarity deterred plant establishment. In
contrast, emergent cover was high in most inundated
segments (turbidity or wave/current exposure
reduce the extent of the emergent zone more than
its density, Trebitz et al. 2005) and richness or
cover did not differ between segments where individual
emergent taxa were present versus absent.
Stuckenia pectinata was one of the few submerged
species surviving in turbid waters, and we believe
that richness and total cover tended to be lower
when S. pectinata was dominant because it dominated
by default in turbid locations rather than because
S. pectinata actually had negative impacts on
other submerged plants.
All negative associations of exotic taxa with
plant richness or cover that we found were at the
scale of inundated segments; we found fewer and
only positive associations using data aggregated to
the wetland scale. This is consistent with other em
pirical studies in the Great Lakes region (25 m2
plots—Lavoie et al. 2003, and 1 m2 plots—
Frieswyk 2005; versus whole-wetland data—
Houlahan and Findlay 2004) and confirms models
showing that exotic/invasive taxa can be negatively
correlated with native richness or diversity on small
spatial scales but positively correlated over larger
spatial scales (Byers and Noonburg 2003, Fridley et
al. 2004). Our rapid-survey method, which simply
assessed plant absence, presence, or dominance
across relatively large segments of inundated wetland,
produced results consistent with studies using
more time-intensive quadrat data or stem counts.
Our results suggest that rapidly obtained shoreline-
wide abundance scores for Stuckenia pectinata,
Phragmites australis, Typha, and Lythrum salicaria
can be summed into an effective indicator for anthropogenic
impacts related to agriculture. The categories
on which the 0 to 3 scale scores were based
(absent, a few individuals, common as part of
mixed plant community, often dominant) are qualitative
but readily assigned. Since mature specimens
of P. australis, Typha, and L. salicaria are identifiable
from tens of meters away and S. pectinata is
distinctive among submerged species, the scores
can be established with a fairly rapid wetland tour.
In almost all of the instances where Frieswyk
(2005) found Typha to be dominant in the
Great Lakes it was exotic T. angustifolia or invasive
T. ´ glauca so it seems reasonable to base an indicator
on whether Typha is dominant or not without
establishing which species it is. Omitting S. pectinata
from the summed shoreline-wide abundance
scores would eliminate the need for a boat and
would more sharply focus the indicator on
exotic/invasive plants, but at the expense of a reduced
correlation with agricultural effects. The correlation
of S. pectinata scores alone with
AgChemPC1 was as high as the correlation of the
summed scores for all three emergent taxa.
Our study documents the presence of exotic M.
spicatum and L. salicaria and invasive P. australis,
P. arundinacea, and Typha in inundated areas of
coastal wetlands throughout the Great Lakes basin;
while exotic P. crispus, B. umbellatus, H. morsusranae,
and N. minor were restricted to some subset
of the lakes. Our 100 m inundated segments were
large enough to describe substantial portions of the
wetlands with a reasonable sampling effort yet
small enough to capture local species interactions,
making them a useful spatial scale at which to
work. Among the exotic/invasive taxa, only emergent
L. salicaria, P. australis, and Typha seemed to
have nuisance characteristics (e.g., often dominant,
associated with elevated cover and reduced richness
of other plants). Submerged and floating-leaf exotic
taxa were no more prone to high abundance or
dominance or to negative associations with plant
richness and total cover than were common native
taxa. Exotic/invasive plants were more prevalent in
the lower lakes where agricultural intensity levels
were generally higher, and many exotic/invasive
taxa tended to increase their frequency of occurrence
or dominance as agriculture intensity increased.
Dominance by native S. pectinata was also
indicative of wetland anthropogenic impacts, since
it was one of the few submerged plants to persist
under high turbidity.
Finding relationships between plant distributions
and the agriculture intensity gradient is not sufficient
to establish that the plants are responding
specifically to nutrient loading. Various types of anthropogenic
disturbance (e.g., loss of natural lands,
row-crop agriculture, population growth, point
source pollutants) tend to be correlated in the landscape
(Detenbeck et al. 1999, Danz et al. 2007),
and multiple types of disturbance can favor growth
of exotic and weedy species over native perennials
(e.g., Galatowitsch et al. 1999, Zedler and Kercher
2004). Nevertheless, agricultural practices constitute
a substantial portion of the stressor regime affecting
wetlands across the Great Lakes (Crosbie
and Chow-Fraser 1999, Danz et al. 2007). Distributions
of some exotic/invasive aquatic plant taxa,
whether measured with rapid indices such as our
shoreline-wide scores or with more detailed taxonomic
surveys, can be interpreted as both a response
to and an agent of wetland disturbance.