xabstract
We compared fish growth and abundance
from the western basin of Lake Erie before (1983–1988)
and after (1989–1993) establishment of zebra mussels
Dreissena polymorpha to determine if growth and abundance
of age-0 fish changed following zebra mussel introduction.
We found no significant differences in age-
0 growth for yellow perch Perca flavescens, walleye
Stizostedion vitreum, freshwater drum Aplodinotus grunniens,
gizzard shad Dorosoma cepedianum, alewife Alosa
pseudoharengus, white bass Morone chrysops, white
perch Morone americana, spottail shiner Notropis hudsonius,
emerald shiner Notropis atherinoides, trout-perch
Percopis omiscomaycus, and rainbow smelt Osmerus
mordax before and after zebra mussel establishment.
Zooplankton abundance may still be sufficient following
zebra mussel establishment to support the same age-0
fish growth. Fish may be switching earlier or relying
more on other prey types, especially the more abundant
benthic invertebrates. Some fish may be supplementing
their diet with zebra mussel veligers, although this has
not been documented. No change in fall abundance was
observed, except that the abundance of age-0 yellow
perch increased significantly after zebra mussel establishment.

xintroduction
Zebra mussels Dreissena polymorpha, first
found in Lake Erie in the mid-1980s, have become
very abundant throughout the western basin. Densities
of adult zebra mussels in the western basin
have ranged from 1,200/m2 to 800,000/m2 (Kovalak
et al. 1993; Leach 1993). Their high density
and filtration capacity (up to 1 L of water/d for
each zebra mussel) is responsible for an increase
in water clarity throughout the lake as well as a
decrease in chlorophyll a in the western basin
(Leach 1993). Holland (1993) found a significant
decrease in diatom abundance in Hatchery Bay
(South Bass Island in western Lake Erie) in the
years following the introduction of zebra mussels.
Competition with zebra mussels for edible phytoplankton,
as well as direct suppression through
filter feeding, may have caused declines of several
zooplankton groups. Beeton and Hageman (1994)
found decreased abundance of rotifers and copepods
in Hatchery Bay following zebra mussel introduction.
MacIsaac et al. (1995) found that the
mean total zooplankton density in the western basin
of Lake Erie was significantly lower in 1989–
1993 than in 1988, mostly due to a decline in rotifer
density. They also noted that copepod nauplii
were lower in the years following zebra mussel
introduction. Dahl et al. (1995) also found that
rotifer biomass decreased in the western basin
since zebra mussel introduction. This indicates
that part of the plankton production has been redirected
to zebra mussel production; therefore, less
is available to other predators of zooplankton.
Changes in the abundance of preferred food
items could possibly affect growth rate or abundance
of larval fish. Zooplankton are generally the
preferred prey of age-0 fish (Hartman et al. 1992;
Wu and Culver 1992). Reductions in density and
biomass of the zooplankton community may therefore
result in reduced growth or abundance of age-
0 fish. The first year of a fishes’ life is a time when
it is most vulnerable to predation; reduced growth
rates at this age may extend this period of vulnerability
(Wu and Culver 1992).
Our objective was to determine if age-0 fish
growth or abundance changed following the introduction
of zebra mussels in the western basin of
Lake Erie. We compared age-0 fish growth and
abundance before and after zebra mussels appeared
in Lake Erie.

xmethods
Age-0 fish have been collected with bottom
trawls in August and October since 1960 from East
Harbor, Ohio, by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(Muth and Busch 1989; Figure 1). The species
collected include yellow perch Perca flavescens,
walleye Stizostedion vitreum, freshwater drum
Aplodinotus grunniens, gizzard shad Dorosoma cepedianum,
alewife Alosa pseudoharengus, white
bass Morone chrysops, white perch Morone americana,
spottail shiner Notropis hudsonius, emerald
shiner Notropis atherinoides, trout-perch Percopis
omiscomaycus, and rainbow smelt Osmerus mordax.
We used data from 1983 and after because
phosphorus loading into the lake was decreasing
prior to the 1980s, resulting in a decrease in phytoplankton
biomass (Makarewicz 1993). Phosphorus
loading has been relatively stable since 1982
(Dolan 1993). Age-0 abundance was recorded as
the arithmetic mean catch per hour of trawling in
October of each year during 1983–1993.
Fish length data were summarized as mean total
length for the August and October capture dates
for each species. The mean growth per day from
August to October was calculated by dividing the
difference between the August and October mean
lengths by the number of days between the August
and October sampling dates. The mean growth for
each species before August sampling was determined
by estimating the hatching date for each
species. The estimated hatch date was determined
by the date the daily air temperature coincided with
the peak spawning temperature for each species
and adding the estimated days to hatching. The
estimated growth rate for each species was calculated
by dividing the difference between the average
hatch size and the August mean length by
the number of days between the estimated hatch
date and the August sampling date. Daily air temperature
came from Toledo Airport (Ruffner and
Bair 1987). Peak spawning temperature, estimated
days to hatching, and average hatch size were identified
for each species using Lee et al. (1980), Auer
(1982), and Craig (1987).
It has been well documented that temperature
affects the rate of growth of age-0 fish, and that
temperatures are variable from year to year (Staggs
and Otis 1996). Therefore, to eliminate temperature
as a factor for fish growth in the analysis, fish
length in August and fish growth from August to
October were divided by the calculated temperature
unit for each species for each year from 1983
to 1993. A temperature unit for the hatch to the
August period was the sum of the mean daily air
temperatures above 08C from the estimated hatch
date to the August sampling date. A temperature
unit for the August to October period was the sum
of the mean daily air temperatures above 08C from
the August sampling date to the October sampling
date.
Temperature-adjusted fish growth and fall age-
0 abundance were separated into two periods: prezebra
mussel years (1983–1988) and post-zebra
mussel years (1989–1992). The year 1989 was selected
as the start of the post-zebra mussel period
because large increases in the density of adults (up
300%) and veligers (up 733%) were observed from
1988 to 1989 at various sites in the western basin
of Lake Erie (Kovalak et al. 1993; Leach 1993).
The nonparametric Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test was
used to test the differences between periods because
the data sets were small and not always normally
distributed. All cases of significant differences
were attained at a significance level of 5%
or less. All statistics were performed using SAS,
version 6.


xresults
From hatching to August and from August to
October, the temperature-adjusted growth did not
change significantly after zebra mussels appeared
for any species (Figure 2). Fall abundance did not
change significantly after zebra mussel introduction,
except for yellow perch (Figure 3). Age-0
yellow perch fall abundance was significantly
higher in 1989–1993 than 1983–1988 (Z 5 2.10,
N1 5 6, N2 5 5, P 5 0.036).

xdiscussion
Fish growth has been shown to be dependent on
type, size, and abundance of prey (Confer and
Lake 1987; Mills et al. 1989; Prout et al. 1990).
Size and abundance of zooplankton have changed
since the introduction of zebra mussels. Mean total
zooplankton density was significantly lower following
zebra mussel introduction, mostly due to
sharp reductions in small zooplankton, such as rotifers
and copepod nauplii (Beeton and Hageman
1994; MacIsaac et al. 1995). Zooplankton biomass
in the western basin declined slightly following
zebra mussel introduction, but rotifer biomass declined
substantially (Dahl et al. 1995).
From their hatching and into August, all fish
species should be zooplanktivorous (Elrod et al.
1981; Muth and Busch 1989; Hartman et al. 1992;
Mills et al. 1992; Wolfert and Bur 1992; Wu and
Culver 1992), some species feeding on the smallersized
zooplankton during this period (Mills et al.
1989). Despite the decreased abundance of small
zooplankton, there was no significant change in
growth for any of the species collected.
From August to October, alewives, rainbow
smelt, and emerald shiners were the only species
studied that should have been primarily zooplanktivores;
the other species should have switched to
a combination of zooplankton, benthos, and fish
(Elrod et al. 1981; Muth and Busch 1989; Hartman
et al. 1992; Mills et al. 1992; Wolfert and Bur
1992; Wu and Culver 1992). Rainbow smelt were
not collected in October. Again, there was no significant
change in age-0 growth. Findings in a
study by Graham (1993) support these results.
Age-0 yellow perch growth decreased from 1988
to 1990 but in 1991 increased to nearly the 1988
growth levels in the western basin of Lake Erie.
Changes in growth over the 4-year period were
thought to be within natural yearly fluctuations for
yellow perch and not a result of the changes
brought about by the introduction of zebra mussels.
Age-0 white perch collected from the same
location showed no significant change in growth
from 1988 to 1991 (Graham 1993).
Age-0 fish in Lake Erie may have adjusted to
changes in prey abundance by changing their feeding
behavior. They may be switching to other prey
at a younger age if zooplankton is not as available.
Post and McQueen (1994) found that age-0 yellow
perch from different lakes or different regions of
a lake had different proportions of benthos in their
diet, depending on the availability of zooplankton.
The switch to other prey may or may not affect
growth of age-0 fish. Roseman et al. (1996) found
that the disappearance of Daphnia spp. did not
result in a depression of age-0 gizzard shad growth
in Oneida Lake; their growth continued uninterrupted
as they switched to an omnivorous diet.
Since the introduction of the zebra mussel, nonmussel
benthic invertebrate abundance has increased.
In the western basin, populations of Gammarus
have dramatically increased in association
with zebra mussel colonies (Dahl et al. 1995). In
other areas in the Great Lakes, similar increases
in abundance of benthic invertebrates have been
observed (Griffiths 1993; Stewart and Haynes
1994). The increased benthic invertebrates in Lake
Erie may be providing an alternate source of food
for age-0 fish.
Some fish could be including zebra mussel veligers
in their diet to offset the decrease in other
zooplankton. However, zebra mussel veligers have
not been found in the stomachs of age-0 yellow
perch, white perch, or rainbow smelt from Lake
Erie (Graham 1993; Kozuchowski 1996).
Fish abundance rather than growth may change
as a result of the introduction of the zebra mussel.
Only yellow perch showed a significant increase
in abundance following zebra mussel colonization.
This may be related to the increased abundance of
benthic invertebrates.
It appears that changes in primary production
following zebra mussel introduction are not having
a noticeable effect on age-0 fish growth. It may
be possible that the zooplankton density and biomass
after zebra mussel colonization is still sufficient
to support the same age-0 fish growth evident
before zebra mussels arrived. Those fish species
that switch from zooplankton to other prey
may be switching earlier or relying more on other
prey types, especially benthic invertebrates.