xabstract
The change in fish fauna was monitored in ponds within irrigation systems in Iwate prefecture, north-eastern
Japan to evaluate the effectiveness of eradicating the invasive piscivorous largemouth bass, Micropterus
salmoides.
Eleven study ponds were categorized into three pond groups: bass-dwelling (n53), bass-eradicated (n53)
and non-invaded ponds (n55).
Species richness and diversity, which temporally decreased in bass-dwelling ponds, increased in basseradicated
ponds. Furthermore, in bass-eradicated ponds, the mean numbers of topmouth minnow and
freshwater goby were gradually restored, but in bass-dwelling ponds the numbers decreased and both species
eventually disappeared.
Although the eradication of piscivorous invaders is helpful for restoring fish species diversity in ponds, its
effectiveness varies among species, and other alien fish such as the rose bitterling (Rhodeus ocellatus ocellatus)
often invade and proliferate in the bass-eradicated ponds.
To ensure successful restoration of native biota and avoid undesirable results, it is necessary to plan and
implement continuous monitoring and adaptive management after eradication of alien predators.

xintroduction
The problem of invasive alien species is a major factor in the
loss of biodiversity (Vitousek et al., 1996). In freshwater
systems, the introduction of invasive species, especially exotic
predators, has a serious impact on native organisms (Moyle
and Light, 1996; Whittier and Kincaid, 1999; Rahel, 2002),
because top-down forces can easily affect several trophic levels
(Strong, 1992; Polis and Strong, 1996). One invasive species
that is considered to have a serious impact on native
freshwater organisms is the largemouth bass (Micropterus
salmoides, Centrarchidae). This is a typical piscivorous fish
that has been introduced into more than 50 countries from
North America (Welcomme, 1992) and can dramatically
change the lake food-web structure (Keast and Webb, 1966;
Whittier and Kincaid, 1999; Jackson, 2002).
The species was introduced into Japan in 1925 for the
purpose of sport fishing and aquaculture (Kaneko and
Wakabayashi, 1998) and spread throughout the lakes and
ponds by 2000 (Yodo and Iguchi, 2004). Degradation of fish
fauna and extinction of several local native fish populations
occurred after the invasion of largemouth bass in many lakes
and ponds (Azuma and Motomura, 1998; Maezono and
Miyashita, 2003; Abekura et al., 2004; Nakai 2004; Yonekura
et al., 2004; Sugiyama and Jinguji, 2005; Tsunoda et al., 2008).
The impact of the largemouth bass is especially serious in small
pond systems (Maezono and Miyashita, 2003; Maezono et al.,
2005) where the loss of fish species diversity in ponds occurred
after its invasion (Yonekura et al., 2004; Sugiyama and Jinguji,
2005; Tsunoda et al., 2008) as seen by the small biomass of
native fish.
Thus, programmes to resolve the problem of largemouth
bass have become increasingly important for conservation and
restoration of native biodiversity in Japanese freshwater
systems. The best solution is to prevent introduction of nonnative
species in the first place, but once introduced,
eradication might be effective (Myers et al., 2000).
Programmes have been implemented to eradicate largemouth
bass and have succeeded in some cases (Ministry of the
Environment, 2004). Generally, however, fish faunal change
was not monitored and, hence, the effectiveness of eradication
was not evaluated. Moreover, it should be noted that
eradication occasionally results in undesirable changes such
as reinvasion of the target alien species, negative trophic
cascade effects, degradation of habitat conditions by exotic
species, or establishment and/or proliferation of other exotic
species (Zavaleta et al., 2001).
The objective of this study was to monitor the change in fish
fauna in ponds within irrigation systems and evaluate the
effectiveness of eradicating largemouth bass by comparing
three types of ponds: bass-dwelling, bass-eradicated and noninvaded
ponds. Research also focused on other exotic species
and suggested an eradication and management plan for exotic
fish in ponds and irrigation systems. Since pond biota is not
usually monitored and largemouth bass are secretly brought
into Japan by anglers (Yodo and Iguchi, 2004), there is little
information about the native fish fauna before the invasion of
largemouth bass, as well as the period of introduction and
initial population of introduced bass. Thus, it is difficult to
grasp the exact impact of largemouth bass on native
communities. However, by including non-invaded ponds as a
reference habitat in the study, it was possible to evaluate the
impact of largemouth bass and the effectiveness of its
eradication.

xmethods
The study sites were 11 small farm ponds in Isawa Ward of
Oshu City, Iwate Prefecture, north-eastern Japan
(391040–070N, 1411000–030E; Figure 1). The area is in the cool
temperate zone and the pond surface freezes over in the winter.
The 11 study ponds are situated within an alluvial fan and are
surrounded by irrigation channels. The surface area and
maximum depth of the ponds ranges from 1400 to 8400m2
(median54050m2) and from 0.6 to 2.9m (median51.2 m),
respectively. All the ponds are connected to a narrow channel
(o1m width) and fish are able to migrate from upstream
channels to the ponds but have difficulty entering from
downstream because of the dams. Although some of the fish
species (e.g. loach, Misgurnus anguillicaudatus (Cobitidae))
temporarily migrate between pond and paddy fields for
spawning (Mitsuo et al., 2008), most other species, including
the largemouth bass, inhabit only ponds during their life time.
Since all the ponds are sited within the same irrigation systems,
the fish fauna in each pond is likely to be similar in nature. In
all the study ponds, the bottom substrate is mud and sand, the
surface area is partly covered with floating plants (Trapa
japonica, Brasenia schreberi, Nymphoides indica) and there is an
emergent plant zone (Phragmites australis, Typha spp.) along
the littoral zone. All the ponds have relatively high turbidity
(transparency measured by turbidity tube (AT-3; HOGA, Inc.,
Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan)) is less than 60 cm in each pond) and
their physicochemical environment appears to be similar. Pond
management, such as desiccation and macrophyte removal, has
not been conducted for the last three decades (Oshu City
administrator, personal communication).
Although the largemouth bass was introduced into Iwate
prefecture after the 1990s (Yodo and Iguchi, 2004), the exact
time of its introduction into the study area/ponds is not known.
However, since there is no habitat for this species in the
upstream area, it must have been introduced by anglers within
the last several years. Largemouth bass were found in six of the
11 ponds in the area by 2004 (Oshu City administrator, personal
communication). In the winter of 2004/2005, largemouth bass in
three of the six ponds were eradicated by drainage and
desiccation by pond managers, whereas the species still
inhabits the other three ponds. Thus, three of the ponds were
bass-dwelling, another three were bass-eradicated and the
remaining five ponds were never invaded by bass at the
beginning of the study period. Moreover, another invasive
alien fish, the rose bitterling Rhodeus ocellatus ocellatus
(Cyprinidae), inhabits some ponds and channels in the area.
Surveys were conducted throughout each pond every midsummer
and late autumn from 2005 to 2009. Fish were
collected by cast net (4.4m diameter with 12mm mesh size),
dip net (40 cm diameter with 2mm mesh size) and minnow trap
(254025 cm with 2mm mesh size). One cast net, two hand
nets and three minnow traps were used for each sampling.
Sampling was conducted for 40 min by three researchers in
each pond. To prevent the demise of sampled fish due to
anoxia, minnow traps were also used for 40 min and fishing
bait (Marukyu Co., Ltd, Okegawa, Saitama, Japan) was used
to compensate for the short saturation time. Sampled fish were
identified and the number of individuals counted in situ. All
fish, except for largemouth bass, were released back into the
same ponds.
To evaluate the success of restoration activity, it is necessary to
compare the conditions of the restored sites not only with
those of the control sites (which are equally degraded, but will
not be restored) but also with those of the reference sites
(which have the desired end conditions) (Chapman, 1999;
Chapman and Underwood, 2000). Referring to the above
assessment design, the study ponds were categorized into three
groups as follows: the ‘control group’ is the bass-dwelling
ponds (n53) in which largemouth bass have not been
eradicated during the study period; the ‘treatment group’ is
the bass-eradicated ponds (n53) as of winter 2004/2005 and
is the target for evaluating the effectiveness of eradication; and
the ‘reference group’ is the ponds that were never invaded by
bass (n55) and have the desired fish fauna as the conservation
goal. Hereafter, the control, treatment and reference groups
are described as ‘control ponds’, ‘treatment ponds’ and
‘reference ponds’, respectively. For comparing temporal
changes of fish fauna among the three groups, the mean
species richness (total species number) and species diversity
(Shannon–Wiener diversity index5H’) were calculated in
each year. In the calculation of species richness and H’,
largemouth bass was excluded. The mean number of
individuals for some frequent fish species (consistent
appearance in more than half the study ponds) was also
compared among the three groups in each year. For statistical
analysis, the Kruskal–Wallis test was used for data comparison
among the three groups and post hoc Scheffe’s multiple
comparison was used for each combination of two groups.
Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to determine the
relationship between pond groups and fish species
composition. Fish species composition was analysed annually
using the variable ‘portion of each fish species in each pond’,
which was calculated as a percentage of the number of
individuals of each species per total number of all collected
fish. All statistical analysis of data was conducted using Excel
Statistics 2008 for Windows (SSRI Co., Ltd).

xresults
In total, 15 fish species, not including largemouth bass, were
found during the study period and mean species number
(range) of control (bass-dwelling), treatment (bass-eradicated)
and reference (non-invaded) ponds was 3.6 (2–6), 5.8 (2–10)
and 5.2 (2–9), respectively. Species richness and diversity (H’)
temporally decreased in the control ponds, whereas it
increased in the treatment ponds and did not change greatly
in the reference ponds (Figure 2). Among these, there was a
significant difference in species richness and H’ only in 2009
(Kruskal–Wallis test: Po0.05 for both). Moreover, species
richness in 2009 was significantly different between the control
and treatment ponds (post hoc Scheffe’s multiple comparison
after Kruskal–Wallis test: Po0.05). On the other hand, there
were no significant differences in temporal changes for species
richness or H’ in each group (Kruskal–Wallis test: n.s. for all).
Four of 15 species, topmouth minnow Pseudorasbora parva,
crucian carp Carassius sp. (Cyprinidae), loach
M. anguillicaudatus (Cobitidae) and freshwater goby
Rhinogobius sp. OR (Gobiidae), consistently occurred in more
than half the ponds each year during the study period. Mean
number of topmouth minnow and freshwater goby in the
treatment ponds gradually increased during 2005–2007,
decreased in 2008 and then stabilized to the same level as in
the reference ponds during 2008–2009 (Figure 3). On the other
hand, the mean number in the control ponds gradually
decreased until the two species disappeared in 2007 (topmouth
minnow) and 2009 (freshwater goby) from all control ponds.
Mean number was significantly different for the topmouth
minnow in 2008 and 2009 (Kruskal–Wallis test: Po0.05
for both) and the freshwater goby in 2007 and 2009
(Kruskal–Wallis test: Po0.05 for both) among the three
groups. There was also a significant difference in the mean
number of freshwater goby between the control ponds and
treatment ponds (post hoc Scheffe’s multiple comparison after
Kruskal–Wallis test: Po0.05). Mean number of loach in the
treatment ponds gradually increased during 2005–2008
(Kruskal–Wallis test: n.s.), but was the least among the three
groups. Mean number of crucian carp gradually decreased in
both the control and treatment ponds, but there were no
significant differences among the three groups (Kruskal–Wallis
test: n.s. for all). There were no significant differences in
temporal changes of number of all fish species in each group
(Kruskal–Wallis test: n.s. for all).
Frequency of occurrence of the alien rose bitterling R. o.
ocellatus among the ponds was 27.3–54.5% (three–six ponds)
during 2005–2009. Mean number of this species increased
dramatically only in the treatment ponds, whereas the number
was quite low in both the control and reference ponds during
the period (Figure 4). There were significant differences in
number of species among the three groups in 2007 and 2009
(Kruskal–Wallis test: Po0.05 for both). However, there were
no significant differences in temporal changes of number of
species in each group (Kruskal–Wallis test: n.s. for all).
As a result of PCA, the first two axes of the principal
component explained 72.16% of the variables in the data set.
Principal component 1 (PC1) explained 49.09% and was
positively related to the loach (PC score: 0.93) and negatively
related to the topmouth minnow (PC score: 0.82). Principal
component 2 (PC2) explained 23.07% and was positively
related to the crucian carp (PC score: 0.88). Fish species
composition of the control ponds was divided into those in the
treatment and in the reference ponds by PC1 (Figure 5).
Furthermore, in the analysis of fish species composition
between the treatment and the reference ponds, the first two
axes of the PCA explained 63.87% of the variables. PC1
explained 40.33% and was positively related to the topmouth
minnow (PC score: 0.97) and negatively related to the crucian
carp (PC score: 0.63). PC2 explained 23.55% and was
positively related to the freshwater goby (PC score: 0.69) and
the alien rose bitterling (PC score: 0.60) and negatively related
to the crucian carp (PC score: 0.61). Fish species composition
between the treatment and the reference ponds was divided by
PC2 (Figure 6).


xdiscussion
In this study, there were significant differences in fish fauna
among the three pond groups compared, whereas there were no
differences in temporal changes of fish fauna in each group. Fish
species richness and diversity gradually declined and, in
particular, the number of small-sized Cyprinidae and goby
species decreased and eventually disappeared in the bassdwelling
(control) ponds. On the other hand, these species
were obviously restored in the bass-eradicated (treatment)
ponds. Previous studies have reported that the impact of
largemouth bass is particularly serious for cyprinid species
(Mori, 2004; Nakai, 2004; Sugiyama and Jinguji, 2005; Tsunoda
et al., 2008) and the fish fauna in ponds is clearly divided into
cyprinid-dominant and centrarchid-dominant assemblage
(Tonn and Magnuson, 1982; Rahel, 1984; Whittier and
Kincaid, 1999). In the study area, eight of the 15 observed
species were cyprinid fish. Moreover, a characteristic feeding
habit of largemouth bass in Japanese water bodies is the
preference for Gobiidae such as certain species of Rhinogobius
(Yodo and Kimura, 1998; Kuge et al., 2004; Tsunoda et al.,
2008, 2009), Tridentiger obscurus and R. giurinus (Azuma and
Motomura, 1998) or T. brevispinis (Tsunoda et al., 2009). In the
control ponds, species composition was characterized by
the loach whose population number did not decrease during
the study period. Thus, it is considered that the impact of
largemouth bass was relatively smaller on the loach compared
with other species. Prey selection and predatory success of the
largemouth bass were influenced by water turbidity (Miner and
Stein, 1996; Reid et al., 1999; Shoup and Wahl, 2009), because
this species forages for prey by sight (Crowl, 1989). The study
ponds had low water transparency and the loach hides in the
muddy substrate (Miyadi et al., 1976); hence, it is considered
that the loach is not vulnerable prey for largemouth bass. There
have been some cases of co-occurrence of alien largemouth bass
and loach in small ponds (Maezono and Miyashita, 2003;
Sugiyama and Jinguji, 2005; Tsunoda et al., 2008).
This study demonstrated the process of restoring fish fauna
in bass-eradicated (treatment) ponds, but the effectiveness
varied among species. Moreover, the characteristics of fish
species composition differed between the treatment and
reference ponds. Since none of the fish species was
reintroduced into the treatment ponds after eradication,
restoring fish fauna depended solely on immigration from
surrounding channels as a population source (‘passive
restoration’). Generally, colonization is an important factor
in both species richness and composition in a patchy habitat
(MacArthur and Wilson, 1967; Tonn et al., 1990) and species
composition and abundance are reflected by the pattern of
source assemblage structure (Snodgrass et al., 1996). In this
study, even though there was a conspicuous increase in the
number of topmouth minnow and freshwater goby individuals,
the number of crucian carp did not change during the period.
Both topmouth minnow and freshwater goby are widely
distributed throughout the channels and ponds in the area,
whereas lentic crucian carp are rarely found in the surrounding
channels (Mitsuo et al., 2010). Thus, the migration of
topmouth minnow and freshwater goby is considered to be
much more likely than that of crucian carp. Moreover,
topmouth minnow showed a dramatic increase in number
and tended to easily dominate the community in a non-native
environment (Britton et al., 2007, 2010), and the alien rose
bitterling increased dramatically but dominated only in the
treatment ponds. Since all three species (topmouth minnow,
rose bitterling and crucian carp) are of similar size and are
omnivorous nekton, and the freshwater goby is also an
omnivorous species (Miyadi et al., 1976), it is considered
that interspecific competition exists among these fish. Hence,
the ‘prior residence effect’ (Braddock, 1949) might have an
influence on the migration and establishment of other fish
species, and eventually on species composition and community
structure.
Another species characterizing the fish fauna of the
treatment ponds was the alien rose bitterling. This species
also ranged broadly in the area (Mitsuo et al., 2010) and, thus,
could have migrated from the surrounding channels. In this
study, the species dramatically increased in number after
eradication of the largemouth bass. Similar cases have
occurred in other taxa and ecosystems (Zavaleta et al., 2001)
as well as in other eradication programmes for largemouth
bass. For example, Maezono and Miyashita (2004) showed
that removal of largemouth bass led to restoring the
population number of native fish but decreased odonate
species richness in farm ponds, because exotic crayfish
(Procambarus clarkii), the main prey of largemouth bass,
dramatically increased in number and adversely affected the
macrophyte-based habitats and oviposition sites of odonate
species. Although the impact of alien rose bitterling on native
species was not clear in the study, competitive exclusion and/or
hybridization have occurred between the species and native
endangered bitterlings (Kawamura et al., 2001; Suguro, 2005).
Since two native endangered bitterlings, Acheilognathus
melanogaster and A. tabira subsp., appear in the study area
(Mitsuo et al., unpublished data), measures should be taken to
prevent the invasion of rose bitterling into their main habitats.
The results of this study showed the effectiveness of
eradicating invasive predators in restoring native species
populations, but also indicated the difficulty of restoring
‘native’ biota. When the restoration of biota depends on
recolonization by native species, consideration must be given
to the environmental conditions of the restored site and
the mobility of each species and/or distance from colonist
pools (Palmer et al., 1997; Scott et al., 2001). Furthermore,
connectivity among habitat patches not only contributes to
reestablishing the community through colonization of native
species but also increases the risk of invasion by alien species.
If recolonization of dominant native species or invasion of
non-target alien species occurs quickly during the restoration
process, attempts to achieve the restoration goal might be
disrupted due to ‘competitive exclusion’ and/or the ‘prior
residence effect’, as shown in the present study. To ensure
successful restoration of native biota and avoid undesirable
results such as invasion, establishment and proliferation of
non-target alien species, it is necessary to plan and implement
continuous monitoring and adaptive management after
eradication of alien predators.