xabstract
Biotic invasions can have far-reaching effects in isolated, eco-insular systems such as the African Great Lakes, certainly in synergy with other anthropogenic stressors that affect ecosystem stability. Interactions between invasive and indigenous taxa across trophic levels often tend to propagate through- out the ecosystem, but also those at the same trophic level may affect biodiversity. Here, we examine faunal interactions between an invasive Asian morph of the cerithioidean gastropod Melanoides tuberculata and indigenous gastropods in long-lived Lake Malawi. Studying quantitative samples, we document a nega- tive spatial correlation between the established invader and endemic Melanoides species, and positive ones between invasive and native M. tuberculata, and between native Melanoides and schistosome-trans- mitting Bulinus. Comparison of modern and fossil samples indicates that Melanoides communities have changed since the middle Holocene from consisting predominantly of endemic taxa (*95%) toward a dominance by non-endemics (*80%). External evi- dence suggests that ecosystem change, such as increased sedimentation and eutrophication, and inter- actions between the invasive and endemic Melanoides species are the most likely causes for these changes. More in-depth study of the benthic ecosystem is required to document interaction mechanisms better, but the invasive taxon is playing an important role in reshaping communities and diversity in Lake Malawi. 

xintroduction
The introduction of the Nile Perch [Lates niloticus (Linnaeus, 1758)] in combination with other stressors, including eutrophication and blooms of the invasive water hyacinth Eichhornia, caused rapid and whole- sale ecosystem change in Lake Victoria (Hecky et al., 2010), and drove many of the [500 endemic cichlid fishes to extinction (Witte et al., 1992). The ecological devastation in this lake substantiates (1) that the effects of biotic invasions can be particularly disas- trous in isolated, eco-insular systems such as the African Great Lakes (Herben, 2005), (2) that such effects may propagate throughout the food web (Pejchar & Mooney, 2009; Strayer, 2010), and (3) that multiple anthropogenic stressors regularly inter- act, resulting in a hastened deterioration of ecosystem stability beyond the anticipated effects of individual stressors alone (Strayer, 2010; Donohue et al., 2013).
Here we study genetic lineages of the parthenoge- netic cerithioidean gastropod Melanoides tuberculata (Mu ̈ller, 1774), some of which have a documented potential for competitive exclusion (Pointier et al., 2011). A camouflaged invasion of Asian M. tubercu- lata to Lake Malawi occurred presumably in the 1980s. This highly invasive morph (distinct genetic lineages known as morph LMI) can morphologically be distinguished from the native M. tuberculata morphs (LMN morphs), and the Melanoides species endemic to Lake Malawi (Genner et al., 2004), even though some LMI populations do not display the full set of diagnostic characters reported by the latter authors (columellar band may be absent in LMI, and axial sculpture may exist on subadult whorls; Van Bocxlaer, pers. obs.). Since invasion, the LMI morph has obtained high abundances and became numeri- cally dominant on shallow, sandy to muddy substrates (Genner et al., 2004, 2008). Recently, we discovered that Asian morphs of M. tuberculata have also invaded Lake Tanganyika and the Congo River, i.e., Africa’s regions with the highest endemic diversity in Ceri- thioidea (Van Bocxlaer et al. unpublished data). Hence, interactions between invasive and native species require urgent documentation to evaluate whether endemic cerithioideans are or may become threatened.
Lake Malawi is perhaps the best system on the African continent to study possible faunal interactions between native mollusks and the invasive M. tuber- culata, because (1) the invasive morph of M. tuber- culata has become fully established in the lake, which has (2) high endemic diversity in cerithioideans, and (3) exceptional Holocene fossil archives that allow tracking community composition through time (Mandahl-Barth, 1972; Genner et al., 2004; Sørensen et al., 2005; Van Bocxlaer et al., 2012). Examining
quantitative mollusk samples from Lake Malawi, we report a dramatic decline in endemic Melanoides and several significant spatial correlations between inva- sive and native taxa.

xmethods
A total of 51 quantitative samples of freshwater mollusks were obtained from the Nankumba Peninsula (Chembe/Cape Maclear) of Lake Malawi in 2004 by Genner et al. (2008) (Fig. 1), and these currently present our best opportunity for a first exploration of possible changes and faunal interactions. Samples were aggregated in 17 groups of 3, with each sample covering 1/10 of a square meter at 4 m of depth; methodological information is provided in Genner et al. (2008). Possible correlations between original taxon count data were examined with several statis- tical methods. We fitted linear models (LMs) to the square-root and logarithmically transformed counts, estimated associated correlation coefficients, and we also applied generalized linear models (GLMs) to the untransformed data to check robustness of our approach, as recommended by some authors (O’Hara & Kotze, 2010). Upon fitting a Poisson distribution, considerable overdispersion was observed, and hence we utilized quasi-Poisson and negative binomial distributions. For logarithmic transformations, 0.1 was added to all counts to avoid zeros in the dataset. All analyses were performed in R 3.0.1 (R Develop- ment Core Team, 2013) using basic functions and the packages boot 1.3-9 (Canty, 2013) and MASS 7.3-27 (Ripley et al., 2013).
We also compare the composition of the extant cerithioidean community with that of early and middle Holocene fossil assemblages from the south of Lake Malawi. These assemblages have been deposited along shorelines that resemble the sandy shores of the Nankumba Peninsula greatly in habitat and substrate composition (Van Bocxlaer et al., 2012), which we demonstrated quantitatively earlier with surveys of diversity and morphological disparity under subsampling schemes (Van Bocxlaer & Hunt, 2013). Fossil shell beds have accumulated over periods as short as a few decades (Van Bocxlaer et al., 2012), but quantitative and qualitative samples obtained from these beds cannot be compared directly with the quantitative samples of modern populations, because shell beds represent accumulations, and because taphonomic processes stand in between living and dead assemblages. Therefore, we only compare rela- tive abundances of cerithoideans in fossil and modern assemblages.
The modern and fossil data were obtained from highly comparable habitats, but both with localized geographical coverage. Limited geographical cover- age along the most intensively studied shorelines of Lake Malawi increases control over external factors, but it also hampers generalizations. Second, the modern, quantitative samples have been collected during a single year, so that these data may include temporal idiosyncrasies. To estimate chances for potential bias caused by these issues, we compared the cerithioidean composition of modern, quantitative samples with qualitative samples obtained during subsequent years (2006–2010), which cover a large part of the Malawi Basin (Fig. 1A, Table 1), and a greater depth range (*0–40 m) than the quantitative data. These samples were collected with dredges and sieves attached to telescope sticks, either from the shore or motorized boats. All these specimens were stored in 80% ethanol. We also compared results with literature data.
Some authors have aggregated the nominal, endemic Melanoides species of Lake Malawi in a ‘M. polymorpha complex’ (Sørensen et al., 2005; Genner et al., 2007), even though distinct morphs can be discerned in the modern and fossil faunas of Lake Malawi (e.g., Mandahl-Barth, 1972; Brown, 1994; Van Bocxlaer et al., 2012). We consider the traditional species valid until a formal taxonomic revision demonstrates otherwise.

xresults
Of all Melanoides specimens obtained from the 51 quantitative samples in Lake Malawi (n = 6,228), *74.6% belonged to the invasive LMI morph of M. tuberculata, 4.4% to the native LMN morphs, and 21.0% to the endemic Melanoides species (Fig. 2). These numbers are very similar to the relative abundances obtained from 71 qualitative samples (n = 1,945 specimens) all over the Malawi Basin (Fig. 1A; Table 1). The LMs and GLMs that were fitted to the quantitative count data yielded very similar results, with several significant correlations that were supported by all or most of the methods applied (Table 2; Online Resource 1). Below we focus
on the square-root transformed data. Densities of the LMI morph of M. tuberculata are negatively corre- lated with those of the endemic Melanoides species (Pearson r = -0.386; P = 0.005), and positively with those of the LMN morphs (Pearson r = 0.371; P = 0.007). No such correlation was found between the abundances of morph LMI and the pulmonate snail Bulinus (Pearson r = 0.018; P = 0.901), which func- tions as the intermediate host of human urogenital schistosomiasis, but the abundances of LMN morphs were positively correlated with those of Bulinus (Pearson r = 0.400; P = 0.004). If all native Mela- noides species (LMN morphs ? endemics) are pooled a significant correlation with Bulinus prevails (Pearson r = 0.310; P = 0.027), which indicates that the correlation between the endemic Melanoides species and Bulinus is trending toward significance (Table 2). About 96% of all fossil Melanoides specimens (n = 20,933) from the early and middle Holocene Chipalamawamba Beds belonged to the endemic species. In nine assemblages deposited between 10.6 and 5.4 ka and each with[300 Melanoides specimens, the proportion of endemics ranged between 72 and 99% (arithmetic mean ± 1 sd = 93 ± 8%). The fos- sil samples indicate that the endemic Melanoides species have decreased massively in relative abun- dance in the south of Lake Malawi since the middle Holocene (Fig. 2).
 
xdiscussion
Data robustness
The relative abundance of Melanoides taxa retrieved from quantitative samples restricted to the Nankumba Peninsula is very similar to those retrieved from widespread qualitative assessments over multiple years, suggesting that our geographically restricted quantitative data do not stand apart from data collected along other shorelines of Lake Malawi. The lake-wide data also indicate that the geographical distribution of the invasive LMI morph within the Malawi Basin has expanded considerably since 1999–2002, when it was still restricted to the southernmost shorelines (Genner et al., 2004). In addition, we examined consistency of our spatial correlations with literature data. Previous authors have independently reported positive spatial correlations between Melanoides and Bulinus (Genner & Michel, 2003; Madsen & Stauffer, 2011), a result that we retrieve here (Table 2). Quantitative data from Louda et al. (1983) seem congruent with our data and that of previous authors, but cannot be compared adequately as these authors are concerned primarily with depth distribution, not spatial correlation. Over- all, the observed congruence suggests that our data can be considered to be reliable and robust.
Community changes
Cerithioidean gastropods are ecologically important for benthic communities, in terms of diversity, biomass, and nutrient recycling (McIntyre et al., 2005; Strong et al., 2011). On the sandy shores in the south of Lake Malawi, Melanoides is particularly abundant; it regularly reaches densities of several thousands of specimens per m2 and it accounts for up to *95% of all mollusks per m2 (Fig. 1). Melanoides was likewise dominant in the fossil assemblages (Van Bocxlaer et al., 2012). About 75% of all Melanoides specimens in the modern samples, however, belong to the invasive LMI morph, so that modern and early to middle Holocene samples differ markedly in compo- sition (Fig. 2). The marked changes in relative abun- dance (Fig. 2; Table 1) do not allow us to conclude a decrease in absolute abundance of the endemic Melanoides species. Given the magnitude of the changes, the massive abundance of endemic Melano- ides species in fossil shell beds compared to their moderate presence in modern beach deposits (Van Bocxlaer, pers. obs.), and the negative spatial corre- lation with the abundant invader, however, absolute abundances may have declined in line with changes in relative abundance.
Causal mechanisms
Correlations provide no evidence of causality, and therefore external data are required to evaluate the causes of spatial patterns. The invasive LMI morph occupies highly similar habitats to LMN morphs and the endemic Melanoides species, i.e., open littoral habitats with soft sediments (Fryer, 1959; Brown, 1994; Genner & Michel, 2003; Genner et al., 2004), which is evidenced by the invader’s micro-sympatric occurrence with native M. tuberculata and endemic Melanoides in 32 and 31 of the 51 quantitative samples, respectively (*60%). (The number is some- what lower for qualitative modern samples, however, still *50%.) African M. tuberculata is known to thrive well in mildly eutrophicated settings (Brown, 1994), and our study area has experienced increased sedimentation and eutrophication over the last decades (Otu et al., 2011). However, it seems unlikely that the negative spatial correlation between morph LMI and the endemic Melanoides or the associated decrease in abundance of endemic Melanoides can be solely attributed to environmental change, because both the invader and the endemic species occur in areas of high sedimentation and eutrophication, and along the more pristine shorelines in the northern part of the basin (Sørensen et al., 2005; Genner et al., 2007) (Fig. 1; Table 1). Figure 1B documents that the invasive morph of M. tuberculata is particularly abundant near river estuaries, which suggests that point eutrophica- tion and sedimentation from rivers provide resource opportunities for the invader, but native Melanoides species do not seem to avoid these environments. Hence, biotic explanations, such as differential pre- dation, parasitism, and resource competition, must also be maintained for the negative spatial correlation
between morph LMI and the endemic Melanoides species.
Predation by molluscivorous fish and crabs is an important interaction mechanism in Lake Malawi (Fryer, 1959), but overfishing has decreased the abundance of snail-eating fish, such as Trematocranus and Mylochromis, over recent decades (Cetron et al., 1996; Stauffer et al., 1997, 2006; Madsen et al., 2011). The gut content of Trematocranus consists for *70% of Melanoides (Evers et al., 2011), suggesting that Melanoides, like Bulinus (Evers et al., 2006), is likely benefitting from predator release caused by overfish- ing. This scenario is supported by the increased abundance of Melanoides and Bulinus (compare e.g., Louda et al., 1983; Genner & Michel, 2003) as fish populations declined over the last decades (Stauffer et al., 1997; Evers et al., 2006; Stauffer et al., 2006; Van Bocxlaer et al., 2014). The influence of crab predation appears also limited; the lake’s single crab species has a general diet, and although it is capable of exploiting living Melanoides as food, it did so only in 20% of the cases when intact Melanoides specimens are offered as the only prey item after starvation (Weigand et al., 2014). This predation incidence is considerably lower than the frequency with which the crab fed (in similar conditions) on Potamogeton and Vallisneria macrophytes (*50%), crushed snails (*80%), dead conspecifics (*50%), and fish (90%), suggesting that the crab is an opportunistic scavenger that unlikely exerts strong predation pressure on mollusks (Weigand et al., 2014). It is thus unlikely that selective predation is a principal cause of the observed negative spatial correlation between endemic Melanoides and the invasive LMI morph of M. tuberculata, but changes in predation pressure over time may be an important factor for the observed overall community changes (e.g., by enhancing inva- sion opportunities for weakly ornamented invaders like the LMI morphs).
Parasitism has the potential to strongly affect population densities of native and invasive Melano- ides tuberculata in Lake Malawi, because the invasive LMI morph appears to be resistant to indigenous trematodes that affect the native LMN morphs (Gen- ner et al., 2008). These trematodes castrate snails, and, hence, parasitism could have population-regulating effects and decrease the competitive strength of LMN morphs in comparison to that of the invasive LMI morph. Negative effects of parasitism on the native LMN morphs are, however, not apparent from the quantitative modern data, given the significant, positive spatial correlation between LMI and LMN morphs (Table 2).
The overall and seemingly lake-wide decline of endemic Melanoides and the negative spatial correla- tions are probably caused in part by competition with the invasive M. tuberculata. The invader has increased massively in abundance over time (Genner et al., 2008), has expanded its distribution in the Malawi Basin to include pristine littoral shorelines (Fig. 1; Table 1), and occurs regularly in micro-sympatry with native Melanoides taxa, indicating that at least part of the resource opportunities of the invader are shared with the native Melanoides species. Moreover, Mel- anoides tuberculata has a versatile diet that consists of microphytobenthic biomass, macroalgae, detritus, and sedimentary organic matter, so that dietary overlap of the invader with other soft substrate dwelling gastro- pods is almost unavoidable, as documented earlier elsewhere (see Miranda & Perissinotto, 2012).
As already mentioned, increased sedimentation, eutrophication, and the decreased abundance of mol- luscivorous fish also resulted in increased abundance of Bulinus over past decades (Van Bocxlaer et al., 2014). However, the positive spatial correlation between Bulinus and morph LMN, or the native Melanoides species altogether, but not with the invasive LMI morph, is difficult to explain and suggests that several interaction mechanisms are at work. In any case, the absence of any correlation between the invasive LMI morph and Bulinus suggests that the invader will unlikely function as an agent of biological control for schistosomiasis in Lake Malawi, although it does elsewhere (Yousif et al., 2010; Pointier et al., 2011).
Much more work specifically aimed at addressing these various hypotheses is required to allow disen- tangling the relative contribution of various causes to the decline of the endemic Melanoides species in Lake Malawi. Beyond resource competition in a traditional sense, chemical cues have been observed to affect interactions between native and invasive freshwater snails in South Africa (Raw et al., 2013), and, hence, allelopathic effects may also play a role in Lake Malawi. An experiment to compare growth, biomass accumulation, and fecundity of endemic Melanoides in the presence and absence of invasive M. tuberculata may demonstrate competition, but it would require
overcoming difficulties with maintaining the endemic species in the lab. Evaluating the impact of various possible causes to spatial patterning would increase our ability to assess potential impacts of invasive Melanoides tuberculata elsewhere in Africa too.
Conclusions
Our study indicates that the endemic Melanoides of Lake Malawi have declined markedly in abundance over time, and that endemic biomass has been replaced by a non-native generalist. Ecosystem changes play an important role in this trend (Van Bocxlaer et al., 2014), and our results suggest that interactions between invasive and native taxa at the same trophic level, aided with several other anthro- pogenic stressors, can strongly alter species compo- sitions in the benthic ecosystems of tropical long- lived lakes. Many invasive taxa are opportunistic, and competition in combination with rapid environ- mental changes may pose too many and/or too rapid changes in interspecific interactions for endemics to adapt to or to overcome.