xabstract
The spread of the invasive alga Caulerpa racemosa var. cylindracea in shallow-water habitats can present
different faunal assemblage composition. We compared the amphipod assemblages associated with
C. racemosa and natural habitats found on shallow-water Mediterranean soft substrata. Four
vegetated habitats were compared: C. racemosa, Caulerpa prolifera, Cymodocea nodosa and Posidonia
oceanica with unvegetated substrata. Samples were collected during two sampling periods
(September 2004 and March 2005). A total of 63 amphipod species were recorded. The results
showed that the vegetated habitats sampled, including C. racemosa stands, supported a higher
abundance and species richness of amphipods. Furthermore, the assemblage structure differed
between the different habitats, while the abundance of some species was significantly different,
depending on habitat. For example, Microdeutopus obtusatus was favoured by C. racemosa habitat;
Ampelisca diadema was associated with C. prolifera beds; and Hyale schmidti was more abundant in
P. oceanica meadows. Habitat invasion by C. racemosa can exert an important influence on biotic
assemblages, modifying habitat structure and associated fauna.

xintroduction
Vegetated habitats allow a greater species diversity and abundance
of individuals than those in unvegetated habitats (Irlandi,
1994; Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999), which is usually correlated with
an increase in habitat complexity (Johnson, 1970; Dean and Connell,
1987; Taylor and Cole, 1994). Several studies have demonstrated
that habitat heterogeneity and complexity play an
important role in influencing the assemblage structure of epibenthic
marine fauna (Stoner, 1980; Edgar, 1992). The pattern of
distribution and species richness and abundance of epifauna on
rocky bottoms are affected by changes in the composition of
associated macroalgae (Connell, 1972). Therefore, changes in
habitat structure of vegetated substrates resulting from the invasion
of species, especially in the case of macroalgae, could affect
the associated fauna (Wikstro¨m and Kautsky, 2004).
The number of introduced species outside their natural ranges is
rapidly increasing, although only a very small fraction of transported
and introduced species becomes invasive, the ability of these species
to restructure and, hence, radically change the functioning of
a recipient habitat is great (Crooks, 2002). Some authors (Vitousek,
1990; Crooks, 2002) recognize three principal effects of invasive
species on ecosystems. First, exotics can affect the availability and
flow of nutrients by altering biogeochemical cycling. Second, invasive
species can affect the flow of energy through food webs. Third,
invaders can affect the availability or quality of physical resources in
the ecosystem (including living space or ‘‘habitat,’’ physical materials,
sediment, light, or water). For instance, invasive plant species
that generate big changes in the vegetation of an area are often
regarded as highly influential ecosystem engineers (see a review in
Crooks, 2002). In marine environment, the Mediterranean Sea is the
most heavily invaded region in the world for introduced seaweeds,
with over 132 invasion events accounting for more than 33% of the
total number of invasions (Williams and Jennifer, 2007).
The invasive Caulerpa racemosa (Forsskål) J. Agardh var. cylindracea
(Sonder) Verlaque, Huisman et Boudouresque (Verlaque
et al., 2003) (hereafter C. racemosa) has spread extensively
throughout the Mediterranean during the last few decades,
invading habitats located in waters having a depth of 0 m to more
than 60 m (Verlaque et al., 2004; Piazzi et al., 2005). The rapid
expansion of C. racemosa is an example of how introduced species
are able to modify Mediterranean habitats, this expansion can be
explained by its very efficient reproductive strategies, both sexual
and asexual, unlike those of Caulerpa taxifolia (Panayotidis and
Zˇ
uljevicˇ, 2001; Renoncourt and Meinesz, 2002).
In Mediterranean coastal areas, two seagrass species, Posidonia
oceanica and Cymodocea nodosa, form meadows on shallow-water
sandy bottoms (Buia & Mazzella, 1991). However, the two seagrasses
have a contrasting meadow structure. Posidonia oceanica is
the largest seagrass species in the Mediterranean, with leaves
sometimes exceeding 1 m in length (Drew and Jupp, 1976). It forms
dense meadows (having a shoot density of between 300 and
1000 shootsm2) with a compact root–rhizome mat and a high leaf
stratum (having a leaf area index of around 7 m2), while C. nodosa
forms meadows that have a low leaf stratum and less compact
rhizome mat (leaf index of 0.4; Rull et al., 1996). Similar to seagrasses,
the alga Caulerpa prolifera may form dense beds on soft
bottoms at water depths of between 1 and 20 m, especially in areas
that are characterised by a low energy environment and considerable
input of organic matter (Sa´nchez-Moyano, 2004).
Amphipods are one of the most important groups of invertebrates
associated with vegetated habitats and play an important
role as trophic resources for fish populations (Sanchez-Jerez et al.,
1999; Stål et al., 2007). Amphipods respond to habitat alteration
and can therefore be used as an indicator of environmental impacts
on vegetated habitats (Bellan-Santini, 1980; Virnstein, 1987; Conradi
et al., 1997; Sanchez-Jerez et al., 2000; Va´zquez-Luis et al.,
2008, 2009).
Since the occurrence of Caulerpa racemosa along Mediterranean
coastal areas was first recorded, several studies concerning the
ecology of this species have been undertaken (see Ruitton et al.,
2005; Cavas et al., 2006). It is known that fauna associated with
exotic algae can differ from natives (Wikstro¨m and Kautsky, 2004;
Schmidt and Scheibling, 2007). However, information on changes
in the associated fauna brought about by this invasive C. racemosa is
scarce (Argyrou et al., 1999; Piazzi and Balata, 2008; Va´zquez-Luis
et al., 2008, 2009). In soft bottoms, C. racemosa grows on sandy
substrates, either unvegetated areas or covering dead matte of
Posidonia oceanica, competing with other macrophytes for the
space. The aims of this study were to compare the structure of
amphipod assemblages associated with C. racemosa stand on soft
bottom with those associated with unvegetated habitat and habitat
vegetated by native species. The hypothesis tested was that the
assemblages associated with C. racemosa stand on soft bottom may
be different from unvegetated habitats and from habitats vegetated
by native macroalgae and seagrasses.

xmethods
The studywas carried out along the Cape of Santa Pola (Alicante,
south-east Spain) on a shallow sandy sea bed. Caulerpa racemosa
was first recorded off Alicante in 2002, where it occurred on bare
soft substrata and dead matte of Posidonia oceanica at a site located
some 10 km north of our study area (Pena-Martı´n et al., 2003). It
now covers large areas of rocky bottoms, bare sandy/muddy
substratum, dead matte of P. oceanica, and also grows mixed with
Cymodocea nodosa and Caulerpa prolifera within a wide depth
range, showing a patchy distribution
Five habitats occurring in shallow waters within the 2–5 m
depth range, were sampled: Caulerpa racemosa stands, Caulerpa
prolifera stands, Cymodocea nodosa meadows, Posidonia oceanica
meadows (P. oceanica) and unvegetated substratum (bare sand).
Several sampling sites, separated by hundreds of metres, were
randomly selected across the study area. All sites had similar
environmental conditions with respect to wave exposure and light
(Ferrandis-Ballester and Bartolome´ -Pina, 1985). Three sampling
sites were allocated within each of the five habitat types, which
were sampled in September 2004 (average water temperature
¼ 27.5 C), which coincides with the period of maximum
vegetative growth of C. racemosa (Piazzi and Cinelli, 1999). Additionally,
the stations were sampled again in March 2005 (water
temperature¼ 13 C), which coincides with the period of minimum
vegetative growth. At each station, three random replicate samples
were collected by SCUBA diving, using a 20 cm 20 cm quadrat, by
scraping the enclosed area using a trowel (Edgar, 1990). A 300 mm
mesh bag was attached to the quadrat to avoid loss of the motile
fauna. Replicate samples were separated by tens of metres. The
collected samples were preserved in 4% formalin. Each sample was
then sieved in sea-water through a 500 mm mesh, to retain the
detritus and fauna. In the laboratory, the amphipods were separated,
identified, and counted. Macrophytes were sorted and
identified to the lowest possible taxon, and the detritus separated.
The macrophytes and detritus were dried for 24 h at 80 C and
weighed. Habitat structure was characterised using three attributes:
species richness of macrophytes, biomass of each species (g),
and quantity of detritus (g).
Two different statistical approaches were used to test for
potential differences in the amphipod assemblage between the
different habitats, based on the null hypothesis of no difference in
the amphipod assemblage composition between the five habitat
types and across the two sampling periods.
Plant biomass, detritus biomass, number of species and total
abundance of amphipod fauna, and abundance of the most abundant
amphipod species were analysed using Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA). To test whether the abundance of amphipods differed
significantly across habitats and time we used a three-factor
ANOVA, which incorporated the following factors: (1) ‘time of
sampling’ (random) with two levels: September 2004 and March
2005; and (2) ‘habitat’ (fixed and orthogonal) with five levels:
Caulerpa racemosa, Caulerpa prolifera, Cymodocea nodosa, Posidonia
oceanica and sand; and ‘site’ (random and nested in ‘time of
sampling’ and ‘habitat’) with three random sampling sites. Prior to
carrying out the ANOVA, the data were tested for heterogeneity of
variance using Cochran’s C-test. Data were OX þ1 transformed in
cases where the variances were significantly different at P¼ 0.05,
and log(Xþ 1) transformed where the variance was still heterogeneous.
Where variance remained heterogeneous, untransformed
data were analysed, as ANOVA is a robust statistical test and is
relatively unaffected by heterogeneity of variances, particularly in
balanced experiments (Underwood, 1997). However, in such cases
special care was taken in the interpretation of results. Furthermore,
in such cases, to reduce type I error, the level of significance was
reduced to P< 0.01. When ANOVA indicated a significant difference
for a given factor, the source of difference was identified using
Student–Newman–Keul (SNK) tests (Underwood, 1981, 1997).
Non-parametric multidimensional scaling (MDS) was used as
the ordination method for exploring differences in the amphipod
assemblage composition (Clarke andWarwick,1994). The similarity
matrix, whichwas calculated using the Bray–Curtis index and using
double square transformed data, was used to construct bivariate
MDS plots. The percentage similarities (SIMPER) procedure was
then used to calculate the contribution of each species to the
dissimilarity between sampling time and habitats (PRIMER
software; Clarke, 1993). A permutational multivariate ANOVA
(PERMANOVA software; Anderson, 2001) was used to test differences
in amphipod species composition following the same
experimental design than the univariate analysis; after the
permutational test a pair wise test was carried out to test differences
among groups.

xresults
A total of 18 algal taxa and two seagrasses were identified. The
highest species richness was recorded from habitats colonized by
Caulerpa racemosa in both sampling periods (Fig. 1). During
September, habitats invaded by C. racemosa were characterised by
a low number of associated algae (9 species plus C. racemosa), but
a higher species richness of macrophytes was recorded in March
(16 species plus C. racemosa) (for further details see Va´zquez-Luis
et al., 2009).
Values of plant biomass recorded from the different habitats
showed the same pattern, with lower values in March for all
habitats, except Caulerpa prolifera stands, for which the opposite
trend was observed. ANOVA indicated a significant difference for
plant biomass between habitats (Ha, P< 0.05; Table 1 and Fig. 1);
this difference was due to significantly higher biomass recorded for
Posidonia oceanica meadows. In Caulerpa racemosa invaded areas,
this species contributed in September with a high biomass value
(62.3%). However, during the coldest period the biomass was only
7.62% of total, the most important habitat features being dead
matte of P. oceanica and the red seaweed Jania rubens. Mean shoot
density values for P. oceanica meadows were 15254.6 shootsm2
in September and 1147.22 4.89 shootsm2 in March.
The amount of detritus present in the different habitats was
highest in March. Significant differences for this attribute were
recorded between habitats (Ha, P < 0.05; Table 1 and Fig. 1). The
highest value of detritus biomass was recorded from Caulerpa
prolifera beds during both sampling periods (830.02 g dwm2 in
September and 1123.85 g dwm2 in March).
A total of 63 amphipod species, belonging to 20 families, were
recorded (Table 2). Species richness was significantly higher in
September (Ti  Ha, P <0.05; Table 4 and Fig. 2a), with the highest
values recorded from the Posidonia oceanica meadows. Total
abundance was similar between habitats in March, but there were
significant differences in September, with the highest value
(4886.11 indm2) recorded from P. oceanica meadows (Ti Ha,
P< 0.05; Table 4 and Fig. 2b). The lowest abundance values were
recorded in September from Caulerpa prolifera stands and unvegetated
bottoms (50 19.54 indm2 and 50 21.65 indm2
respectively). Of the two Caulerpa habitat types, Caulerpa racemosa
had the highest abundance values, which were similar for both
sampling periods (1577 indm2 in September and 1672 indm2 in
March). On the other hand, C. prolifera stands had the lowest
abundance values in both sampling periods, with the lowest values
recorded in September (Table 2, Fig. 2b).
The two-dimensional MDS plot for showed segregation of
sampling stations mainly by habitat; two main groups can be
distinguished: the first corresponding to Posidonia oceanica
meadows and the second corresponding to Caulerpa racemosa and
Cymodocea nodosa habitats, while the remaining two habitats
(Caulerpa prolifera stands and bare sand) were the most dissimilar
to each other and to the each of the other three habitat types
(Fig. 3). The multivariate response of amphipod assemblage
showed significant differences among habitats regarding sampling
times (PERMANOVA, Ti Ha, P< 0.01, Table 3). After the pair wise
test, in September P. oceanica was different to the rest of the
habitats. Nevertheless in March C. prolifera, C. nodosa and P. oceanica
were similar with differences with sand and C. racemosa. The
species that contributed most to the dissimilarity between
amphipod assemblages were Caprella grandimana, Stenothoe monoculoides,
Microdeutopus obtusatus, Apocorophium acutum, Ampithoe
ramondi, Ampelisca diadema, Hyale schmidti, Ericthonius
brasiliensis, Leptocheirus guttatus and Elasmopus brasiliensis. These
species comprised between 60.09% and 85.74% of the total
amphipod abundance in vegetated habitats.
The ten most abundant amphipods had different species
abundance values with respect to the macrophyte habitats from
which they were recorded. The abundance values of Caprella
grandimana and Stenothoe monoculoides were significant higher in
Caulerpa racemosa stands in March (Ti Ha, P < 0.01; Table 4 and
Fig. 4a, b). Microdeutopus obtusatus was significant higher at C.
racemosa (Ha, P< 0.01, Table 4, Fig. 4c). Apocorophium acutum was
more abundant in C. racemosa stands in September but no significant
differences were found (Table 4 and Fig. 4d). The abundance of
Ampithoe ramondi was significant higher in habitats invaded by C.
racemosa and in Cymodocea nodosa meadows (Ha, P <0.01; Table 4
and Fig. 4e). Only one species, Ampelisca diadema, had a significant
higher abundance in Caulerpa prolifera stands (Ha, P< 0.01, Table 4,
Fig. 4f). On the other hand, several species seemed to be more
abundant in Posidonia oceanica meadows; for example, the abundance
of Hyale schmidti is significant higher in this habitat (Ha,
P< 0.01; Table 4 and Fig. 4g). In the case of Ericthonius brasiliensis
these differences were detected only in September being more
abundant in P. oceanica meadows (Ti Ha, P< 0.05, Table 4,
Fig. 4h). Finally, Leptocheirus guttatus and Elasmopus brasiliensis had
the same abundance pattern as Ericthonius brasiliensis, although no
significant differences were found, possibly to the highest variability
of their abundance among sites (Table 4, Fig. 4i, f).

xdiscussion
Complex natural habitats, such as Posidonia oceanica meadows,
hold the highest amphipod abundance and species richness.
However, the new habitat generated by Caulerpa racemosa supports
a diverse and abundant amphipod assemblage compared with
other natural habitats. Overall, the amphipod assemblage structure
differed between the different vegetated habitats; this aspect can
be attributed to amphipod habitat preferences, as has been shown
by other authors who have demonstrated active selection of
substratum (Stoner, 1980; Roberts and Poore, 2005), but also to
differential predation among habitats (Orth, 1992).
Caulerpa racemosa could affect the benthic communities in two
different ways. First, adding a complex structure where none
previously occurred (e.g. if this alga colonises bare substrates), such
as our study case, or replacing other macrophytes. There exist many
studies showing higher epifaunal abundance on vegetation
compared to bare substrates (Heck and Orth, 1980; Stoner, 1980;
Hicks, 1982; Edgar et al., 1994; Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999). The
presence of vegetation enhances the heterogeneity and complexity
of habitat available for the epifauna, increasing the abundance and
species richness of amphipods compared to unvegetated habitats.
In our study area we have not detected C. racemosa replacing other
macrophytes in soft bottoms, but it is important to remark that C.
racemosa in our study area was present in an incipient stage.
Nevertheless, the replacements of native communities or competition
with them have been detected in other studies, for instance,
a study carried out by Dumay et al. (2002) reveals that Caulerpa
taxifolia and C. racemosa in competition with Posidonia oceanica
seagrass beds affect the mean leaf longevity, leaf primary production
and the sheath primary production of the seagrass. All the
changes on habitat structure could affect the chemical and physical
properties of the macrophytes and, in consequence, the amphipod
preferences.
The heterogeneous and complex habitat structures of Posidonia
oceanica and Cymodocea nodosa meadows exert a variable influence
on the abundance of amphipods, depending mainly on temporal
changes in bed structure (Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999). In our study, P.
oceanica meadows are the most important habitat for amphipods in
summer. Of the habitats found on soft sediment bottoms in the
shallow waters of the Mediterranean, P. oceanica meadows are
considered to be the most structurally complex (Pe´ re` s and Picard,
1964; Duarte, 2000). On the other hand, C. nodosa habitat did not
contribute to such high amphipod abundance during summer but
its importance in winter equalled that of P. oceanica habitat.
Although C. nodosa meadows do not have a high structural
complexity, they supported a high diversity of invertebrates;
consequently the importance of this seagrass habitat, where
present on Mediterranean shallow sandy bottoms should not be
undermined, especially during winter. Perhaps, for some faunal
groups, high structural complexity of P. oceanica meadows renders
them too compact and consequently there is less available habitat
compared with less structurally complex meadows, such as those
formed by C. nodosa (Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999).
The Caulerpa prolifera and Caulerpa racemosa habitats supported
very different amphipod abundances. Caulerpa racemosa was the
second most important habitat after Posidonia oceanica beds, while
abundance values recorded from C. prolifera stands were relatively
low. Nonetheless, other authors note the importance of C. prolifera
beds as an important habitat for invertebrates (Sa´nchez-Moyano
et al., 2007). It has been demonstrated by several studies that
habitat patchiness influences total epifaunal abundance, in general,
epifaunal abundance is highest in patchy or very patchy habitats
compared to continuous habitats, while amphipods are one of the
main groups that respond to this pattern of distribution (see
a review in Bostro¨m et al., 2006). In our study, C. racemosa represents
an initial stage of invasion, which means that it is patchily
distributed and surrounded by seagrass. The observed high
amphipod abundance recorded from our study area may be related
to the high structural heterogeneity of C. racemosa habitat, while
the alternative host plant habitats are affecting the amphipod
assemblage (Poore, 2005). On the other hand, C. prolifera stands are
continuous, compared with those of C. racemosa, and this is
reflected in the recorded amphipod abundance.
Regarding to species richness, seagrass habitat keeps the highest
values. We note a very high species richness for Posidonia oceanica
meadows; 33 species in total. Other studies have reported 16, 29
and 16 amphipod species (Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999, 2000; Borg
et al., 2006, respectively with this habitat). In the case of Cymodocea
nodosa meadows, values of species richness recorded during the
present study are similar to those from other studies (18 species,
Sfriso et al., 2001; 19 species, Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999). Nevertheless,
in the Mediterranean, Caulerpa racemosa meadows on soft
substrata support a relatively diverse amphipod assemblage, being
higher than C. racemosa growing on rocky substrate (Va´zquez-Luis
et al., 2008a). This may be related to the reduced structural
complexity of the latter habitat types. However, Caulerpa prolifera
has similar species richness to other invasive Caulerpa species,
Caulerpa taxifolia. Bellan-Santini (1995) reported 7 species from
sampling carried out in September and 11 from sampling in March;
these values are similar to those obtained for C. prolifera stands in
our study area (6 in September and 18 in March). Sa´nchez-Moyano
et al. (2007) reported up to 17 amphipod species from C. prolifera
beds, which is also similar to our values recorded in March, and C.
racemosa seems to support richer assemblages than C. prolifera. This
could be due because of the macrophyte associated with the
invasive specie while C. prolifera is present in a dense and continuous
meadow with lower habitat complexity.
Temporal differences across the sampled habitats can be attributed
to changes in habitat complexity (e.g. seasonal changes) and
alteration of habitat heterogeneity (increase of epiphytes and
associated algae). Seagrasses exhibit important seasonal changes in
leaf index, leaf biomass and epiphytes, which ultimately affect the
associated fauna (Stoner and Lewis,1985). Both Caulerpa species are
algae having tropical and subtropical affinities and are strongly
affected by seasonal fluctuations ofwater temperature. Both species
show a considerable decrease of frond biomass during winter and
remarkable growth when temperatures increase (Piazzi and Cinelli,
1999). These temporal changes should affect the population
dynamics of the amphipod fauna, which would explain a proportion
of the temporal variability found among sampling times. Nonetheless,
appropriate temporal replication is needed in order to test
seasonal and intrannual patterns of amphipod community.
Nevertheless, the abundance of potential food items could result
from a balance between refuge against predation and the availability
of favourable space for living (Orth, 1992). Therefore, it may be
necessary to consider the effects of predation to explain the changes
of amphipod abundance across habitats detected on our study.
Experimental studies carried out by Moksnes et al. (2008) revealed
that seagrass communities are dominated by strong top-down
processes that regulate the biomass and assemblage structure of
both macroalgae and mobile fauna. In a manipulative experiment
involving treatment with a caged goby predator, size-specific
predation reduced the abundance of adult gammarids by 93%
(Moksnes et al., 2008). Caine (1991) also detected a substantial
reduction of amphipod abundance due to predation. Predation
pressure by fishes in temperate shallow environment is very high
during warm seasons, and all habitats, except Posidonia oceanica
meadows, had reduced amphipod abundance during summer.
Perhaps predation pressure in P. oceanica meadows is lower as
a result of the high complexity of the leaf stratum (Orth, 1992).
One remarkable property of the two Caulerpa species is the
accumulation of detritus, which persisted throughout the year. In
both species, the amount of detritus was higher than in seagrass
meadows, but was especially high in Caulerpa prolifera stands,
which had up to 6.5 times more detritus than Caulerpa racemosa
beds stands. Detritus plays a very important role as a trophic
resource for marine invertebrates, being one of the main trophic
pathways of the marine ecosystem (Valiela, 1995) and is one of the
most important features of habitat structure in vegetated habitats
(Allesina et al., 2005). Therefore, any modification of the detritus
compartment can affect the overall trophic web, because it could
lead to a change in the faunal assemblage structure resulting from
modification of trophic guilds due to different trophic requirements.
The detritus compartment could be supporting the high
abundance of amphipods in both C. prolifera and C. racemosa stands,
but perhaps the detritus also serves to make the invertebrates less
available to predators (e.g. fish), unless the latter are more
specialized for foraging, such as Mullus surmuletus, which was
frequently seen feeding in C. racemosa stands on soft bottoms
(personal observation).
It has been demonstrated that amphipods can actively choose
substrata and show high habitat fidelity (Nelson, 1979; Stoner,
1980; Roberts and Poore, 2005; Poore and Hill, 2006). Further to
this, our study shows that some species have a higher abundance in
specific habitats. For example, some of the species recorded in our
study, such as Caprella grandimana, Stenothoe monoculoides, Microdeutopus
obtusatus and Apocorophium acutum, were associated with
Caulerpa racemosa. We think that these species favor C. racemosa
because of two main factors that are related to the stolon structure
and associated algae: reduction of hydrodynamism and increased
sedimentation. Caprella grandimana is very common in algae that
inhabit the intertidal and shallowwaters along the Strait of Gibraltar
and other Mediterranean localities in the vicinity of our study
area (Guerra-Garcı´a, personal communication) The same applies to
S. monoculoides, which is usually associated with photophilic algae
in infralittoral zone (Ruffo, 1998). Microdeutopus obtusatus, is
generally associated with Ulva, Posidonia oceanica meadows and
bare fine sand habitats (Ruffo, 1982), but has also recently been
recorded from sediments (Roberts and Poore, 2005) and C. racemosa
stands on rocky habitats (Va´zquez-Luis et al., 2008a). In our study
area, A. acutum was very abundant in C. racemosa stands in
September, while this species seems to prefer environments having
a low hydrodynamic regime and high sedimentation rate (Conradi
et al.,1997; Guerra-Garcı´a and Garcı´a-Go´ mez, 2005). That Ampelisca
diadema is closely associated with Caulerpa prolifera, and even with
C. racemosa may be related to the increase of fine sediment fraction
trapped. This species appears normallyat sandyandmuddybottoms
(Ruffo, 1982), and possibly the sediment accumulation by Caulerpa
species generates the perfect habitat in within to live. This species
has been reported by Sa´nchez-Moyano et al. (2007) as being typical
of C. prolifera meadows. Ampithoe ramondi has a preference for
native seaweeds and seagrasses (Ruffo, 1982; Viejo, 1999; Roberts
and Poore, 2005; Va´zquez-Luis et al., 2008a). We have detected, as
Sa´nchez-Moyano et al. (2001), the displacement of this species
resulting from the presence of C. prolifera. All ampithoids are
herbivorous, so the value of the algae or their epiphytes as food could
be important factors in the distribution. Caulerpa species produce
metabolites against epiphytes, competition and predators and
studies carried out by Gollan andWright (2006) demonstrated that
Caulerpa taxifolia is low preference food for the ampithoid Cymadusa
setosa. Other important species, such as Hyale schmidti, Ericthonius
brasiliensis, Leptocheirus guttatus and Elasmopus brasiliensis are
highly abundant at P. oceanica meadows, a result consistent with
other authors (Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999, 2000; Borg et al., 2006).
In conclusion, our study shows that Caulerpa racemosa stands
present on soft substrata present different amphipod assemblage
than other Mediterranean habitats on soft substrate. The observed
abundance and species richness of amphipods were relatively high.
It is important to note that stands of Caulerpa prolifera, which is
considered a native species of the Mediterranean Sea, had relatively
low amphipod abundance and species richness compared with the
invasive C. racemosa. Since C. racemosa has spread very rapidly and
extensively during the last 17 years (Klein and Verlaque, 2008), one
predicts considerable changes, in the near future, in the composition
of the faunal assemblages associated with soft-bottom habitats,
given the expected colonisation of large areas of the sea bed by
this species. Such a change, which may occur alongside gradual
regression of seagrass meadows, may contribute to a major change
in the structure of the Mediterranean benthic assemblages.