xabstract
The effects of the invasive species Caulerpa racemosa var. cylindracea (hereafter C. racemosa) on amphipod assemblages associated
with shallow-water rocky habitats were studied. Two habitats located along the SE Iberian Peninsula were compared; invaded and
non-invaded. The results showed that growth of C. racemosa affects habitat structure, influencing the species composition and biomass
of macroalgae, and detritus accumulation. In turn, such changes in habitat features affected the associated amphipod assemblages with
different ecological requirements. However, the species richness of amphipods was relatively high in both habitats, while the species composition
of amphipods changed completely. For example, some species such as Ampithoe ramondi and Hyale schmidti did not colonize
invaded habitats, while others such as Apocorophium acutum were favoured by the spread of C. racemosa. Habitat invasion by C. racemosa
can have an important influence on biotic assemblages, modifying both habitat structure and the associated fauna, with unknown
effects on the overall ecosystem.

xintroduction
The green alga Caulerpa racemosa (Forsska˚l) J. Agardh
var. cylindracea (Sonder) Verlaque, Huisman et Boudouresque
(Verlaque et al., 2003) (hereafter C. racemosa) was
first detected in Tunisia (Mediterranean Sea) in 1926. More
recently, during the 1990s, C. racemosa spread steadily
throughout the Mediterranean region (see Piazzi et al.,
2005). Recent genetic analyses have shown that the C. racemosa
population originated from the southwest coast of
Western Australia (Verlaque et al., 2003), and is not a Lessepsian
migrant as thought originally. A remarkable spread
of C. racemosa throughout the Mediterranean has been
recorded during the last 15 years or so, during which the
alga invaded different habitats located at water depths of
0 m to more than 60 m. The recorded rate of invasion
has been much faster than that for other invasive species
such as Caulerpa taxifolia (Verlaque et al., 2003). The rapid
spread of C. racemosa can be explained by its very efficient
reproductive strategies, both sexual and asexual (via propagules),
which is not the case with C. taxifolia (Panayotidis
and Zˇ uljevicˇ, 2001; Renoncourt and Meinesz, 2002).
Several studies have demonstrated that habitat heterogeneity
and complexity play an important role in influencing
the assemblage structure of epibenthic marine fauna
(Johnson, 1970; Stoner, 1980; Dean and Conell, 1987;
Edgar, 1992; Taylor and Cole, 1994; Ayala and Martı´n,
2003). The pattern of distribution and species richness
and abundance of epifauna on rocky bottoms is affected
by changes in the composition of associated macroalgae
(Connell, 1972). Therefore, changes in habitat structure
of vegetated substrates resulting from the invasion of
species such as C. racemosa could affect the associated
fauna, including amphipods.
Amphipods are one of the most important groups of
invertebrates associated with vegetated habitats, and they
play an important role as trophic resources for fish populations
(Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999; Sta˚l et al., 2006). Amphipods
respond to habitat alteration and can therefore be
used as an indicator of environmental impacts on vegetated
habitats (Bellan-Santini, 1980; Virnstein, 1987; Conradi
et al., 1997; Sanchez-Jerez et al., 2000).
Since the first records of spread of C. racemosa along
Mediterranean coastal areas, several studies concerning
the ecology of this species have been undertaken (see Ruitton
et al., 2005; Cavas et al., 2006). However, information
on changes on the associated fauna brought about by the
invasive alga is lacking (Argyrou et al., 1999; Piazzi and
Balata, 2007). The main aim of this study was to assess
the effects of C. racemosa on amphipod assemblages associated
with a shallow-water rocky bottom habitat in the
southwestern Mediterranean Sea, by comparing natural
rocky algal assemblages and the same habitat type that
has been invaded by C. racemosa. The hypothesis tested
in our study was: invasion by C. racemosa should influence
the habitat structure of rocky bottom algal assemblages
and, consequently, the assemblage structure of associated
epifauna such as amphipods may be affected, in terms of
species richness and abundance.


xmethods
Fieldwork was carried out along the Cape of Santa Pola
(Alicante, south-east Spain; Fig. 1) on a shallow rocky platform.
In Alicante, C. racemosa was first recorded in 2002 at
a site located around ten kilometres north of our study
area, where it colonised soft sediments and dead matte of
Posidonia oceanica. Following two months, C. racemosa
was detected on the rocky platform in our study area
(Pena-Martı´n et al., 2003). The alien alga now occurs in
extensive areas of ecologically important rocky bottoms,
on sandy and muddy substrata, and on dead matte of
P. oceanica. It also occurs intermixed with Cymodocea nodosa
in meadows of the seagrass within a wide depth range (0.2–
1.5 m) and with patchy distribution.
Shallow rocky habitat, located within the 0.2–0.5 m
depth range, was sampled. Several sampling sites, separated
by hundreds of metres, with C. racemosa and without
the alien alga, were randomly selected across the study
area. All sites presented similar environmental conditions
with respect to wave exposure and light (Ferrandis-Ballester
and Bartolome´-Pina, 1985). Three ‘invaded’ rocky habitat
sites and another three ‘non-invaded’ rocky habitat
sites were sampled in September 2004 (average water temperature
= 27.5 C), which coincides with the period of
maximum vegetative growth of the alga (Piazzi and Cinelli,
1999). Other sites were sampled again in March 2005
(water temperature = 13 C) which coincides with the period
of minimum vegetative grow. At each site, three random
replications were taken using a 20  20 cm quadrat
by scraping the whole surface using a trowel (Edgar,
1990). Samples were separated by tens of meters. A
300 lm mesh bag was attached to the quadrat to avoid loss
of the motile fauna. Samples were preserved in 4% solution
of formaldehyde in seawater. Each replicate was sieved in
sea-water through a 500 lm mesh, obtaining the fine fraction
of detritus. In the laboratory, the amphipods were separated,
identified, and counted. After that, algae were
sorted as well as the bigger fragments of detritus. Afterwards
the macrophytes and the detritus were dried for
24 h at 80 C, and weighed. The macrophytes were identified
to the species level. Habitat structure was characterised
using three attributes: species richness of macrophytes, biomass
of each species (g) and quantity of detritus (g).
Two different statistical approaches were used to identify
potential changes in the amphipod assemblages and
habitat features, based on the null hypothesis of no change
in amphipod assemblage composition between the two
habitat types across different sampling times.
Non-parametric multidimensional scaling (MDS) was
used as the ordination method for exploring changes in
amphipod and macroalgal assemblages (Clarke and Warwick,
1994). The similarity matrix, which was calculated
using the Bray–Curtis index and double square transformation
of data, was used to construct bivariate MDS plots.
Calculation of percentage similarities (SIMPER) was then
applied to calculate the contribution of each species to
the dissimilarity between sampling times and habitats.
(PRIMER software; Clarke, 1993).
Algal biomass, C. racemosa biomass, species richness of
seaweeds, biomass of detritus, total abundance of amphipods,
species richness of amphipods and abundance of
seven amphipod species (the most important by SIMPER)
were analysed using ANOVA. To test whether the abundance
of amphipods was similar across habitats and times
we used an analysis of variance (ANOVA) which incorporated
the following factors: ‘Time of sampling’, a fixed factor
and orthogonal, with two treatments: September-04
and March-05; ‘habitat’, a fixed factor, with two treatments:
macroalgal community with C. racemosa (invaded
habitat) and without C. racemosa (non-invaded habitat),
and ‘Site’, a random factor and nested with the both main
factors, with three random sampling sites.
Prior to ANOVA, heterogeneity of variance was tested
with Cochran’s C-test. Data were
p
x + 1 transformed if
variances were significantly different at p = 0.05, and
log(x + 1) transformed if variance was still heterogeneous.
Where variance remained heterogeneous, untransformed
data were analysed, as ANOVA is a robust statistical test
and is relatively unaffected by heterogeneity of variances,
particularly in balanced experiments (Underwood, 1997),
however, in such cases special care was taken in the interpretation
of results. Furthermore, in such cases, to reduce
type I error, the level of significance was reduced to
<0.01. When ANOVA indicted a significant difference for
a given factor, the source of difference was identified by
applying the Student–Newman–Keul (SNK) test (Underwood,
1981; Underwood, 1997).

xresults
A total of 24 taxa of macroalgae and one seagrass
species were identified (Table 1). Species richness showed
significant seasonal differences (Table 2; Ti=P < 0.05).
During September, the invaded habitat showed a reduced
number of macroalgal species: only five together with C.
racemosa, compared with 11 species recorded from the
non-invaded habitat. The most important species in
terms of biomass in the non-invaded places were Jania
rubens, Halopteris scoparia and Cystoseira brachicarpa,
while in the invaded habitat C. racemosa, J. rubens and
Padina pavonica were most important (Table 1). In
March, differences between invaded and non-invaded
habitats were lower (14 where C. racemosa was present
and 16 species where it was absent). The most important
species in non-invaded sites during March were Corallina
elongata, J. rubens and Dictiota fasciola; and C. racemosa,
Cladophora sp. and H. scoparia dominated at invaded
sites (Table 1). The MDS two-dimensional representation
of macrophyte biomass clearly showed segregation of
sampling sites mainly related to sampling time and
habitat (Fig. 2).
In the case of algal biomass, excluding C. racemosa, significant
differences were noted for the invaded habitat with
respect to the non-invaded habitat (Table 2; Fig. 3). Total
algal biomass recorded in September was similar between
the two different habitats (347.67 ± 117.44 g dw m2 for
non-invaded habitat compared to 379.55 ± 64.63 g dw m2
for invaded habitat; Table 1), however, C. racemosa contributed
a high value (74.6%), and replacing other native
species. Non-invaded sites showed the highest mean biomass
value, which reached a maximum value of
826.46 ± 203.15 in September (Fig. 3). However, total biomass
(326.52 ± 79.21 g dw m2) at the invaded sites, without
a recovery of the community in spite of the reduction
of C. racemosa biomass.
Differences in accumulated detritus biomass was significant
between habitats (P < 0.05, Table 2). The highest values
were recorded from invaded habitats during both
sampling periods (472.48 g dw m2 in September and
466.92 g dw m2 in March). On the other hand, detritus
biomass was relatively low at non-invaded habitats during
September (5.87 ± 1.51 g dw m2), and higher in March
(242.22 ± 47.25 g dw m2; Fig. 3).
A total of 31 amphipod taxa, belonging to 13 families,
were recorded (Table 3). Species richness was significantly
different (Ti, P < 0.05, Table 4; Fig. 4a) among sampling
times but similar between habitats. In September, species
richness recorded from the habitat dominated by C. racemosa
was similar to that recorded from the non-invaded
habitat (16 and 14 species respectively; Table 3), while for
both habitats, values were higher in March (20 and 24 species,
Table 3). Only ten species were present in both habitats
and in both months: Amphilochus neapolitanus,
Ampithoe ramondi, Microdeutopus spp., Caprella spp., Apocorophium
acutum, Elasmopus spp., Lysianassa costae,
Pereionotus testudo, Stenothoe monoculodes and Hyale
schmidti. Seven species were found only in the non-invaded
habitats: Amphilochus sp., Ampelisca serraticaudata,
Ampithoe ferox, Lembos sp., Leptocheirus guttatus, Leptocheirus
sp. and Stenothoe tergestina; while there seemed to
be a relationship between the invaded habitat and the following
six amphipods: Ampelisca diadema, Corophium spp.
Corophium insidiosum, Gammarella fucicola, Melita palmata
and Orchomene humilis. Total abundance was similar
between habitats in September, but there were significant
differences between the two habitats in March, with a
maximum value of 6497.22 ind/m2 recorded from the noninvaded
habitat (TixHa P < 0.01, Table 4; Fig. 4b).
The two-dimensional MDS plot for the amphipod
assemblages showed segregation of sampling sites that
was mainly related to the sampling period, while moderate
segregation was noted by habitat type during March
(Fig. 5). The main species responsible for dissimilarities
in amphipod assemblages were Caprella spp., A. ramondi,
Microdeutopus spp., Elasmopus spp., A. acutum,
H. schmidti and L. costae, for which an average dissimilarity
of 64.73 % was noted between habitats. Together, these
species comprised 90 % of the total amphipod abundance.
The seven most important amphipod species showed different
patterns of abundance values with respect to macroalgal
assemblage. Abundance of A. ramondi and H. schmidti
were significantly higher in non-invaded habitats (Ha,
P < 0.05, Table 4; Fig. 6a, b). On the other hand, A. acutum
had a significantly higher abundance in the invaded habitat
(Ha, P < 0.05, Table 4; Fig. 6c). Significant differences were
recorded for Microdeutopus spp. in terms of sampling times
(Ti, P < 0.05, Table 4; Fig. 6d), while it was more abundant
in September at invaded habitats but without significant
differences.
With regard to differences between sampling times
(Table 3), several species appeared only in September
(Amphilochus sp., Melita palmata and Orchomene humilis);
or in March (Ampelisca diadema, Ampelisca serraticaudata,
Lembos sp., Leptocheirus guttatus, Corophium spp., Corophium
insidiosum, Dexamine spiniventris, Gammarella fucicola,
Melita hergensis, Lysianassa sp. and Stenothoe
tergestina). Dissimilarity between sampling times within
non-invaded sites was not very high (48.09%); the most
important species contributing to this dissimilarity were
Caprella spp. and H. schmidti. Dissimilarity between sampling
times within invaded sites was 51.71%, the most
important species contributing to this dissimilarity were
Caprella spp. and L. costae.
The abundance of two species (Caprella spp. and Elasmopus
spp.) was not significantly different between the two
habitat types, but there was a clear pattern of higher abundances
in non-invaded habitat. The abundance of Caprella
spp. varied significantly with respect to season, being more
abundant in March, especially in the non-invaded habitat
(Ti, P < 0.05, Table 4; Fig. 6e). Elasmopus spp. seemed to
be more abundant on native seaweeds, especially during
September, but not statistical differences were noted (Table
4, Fig. 6f). Finally, the abundance of L. costae, was higher
in non-invaded habitats, but this was true only in March
(TixHa, P < 0.01, Table 4, Fig. 6g); the pattern was opposite
during September, but without any significant
differences.

xdiscussion
Our results show that the presence and abundance of
C. racemosa had a marked effect on the macroalgal assemblage
structure of Mediterranean shallow rocky communities,
affecting the species composition of vegetation and
increasing the detritus stock. This causes important
changes in the associated amphipod assemblage, in terms
of both abundance and species composition. The effects of
the invasive species on habitat structure were more important
in September because the alga was dominant at that
time. The seasonal variation in abundance values for C.
racemosa recorded from our study area was similar to that
described in other localities, i.e. with maximum development
in the warm season, while biomass values were similar
or even greater than those recorded from other Mediterranean
localities (Piazzi and Cinelli, 1999). The peculiar
growth of C. racemosa, with stolons that spread rapidly
in all directions, and its colonisation pattern that results
from sexual reproduction (Panayotidis and Zˇ uljevicˇ,
2001), together with dispersal of fragments detached from
the plant (Ceccherelli et al., 2001; Ceccherelli and Piazzi,
2001) and propagules (Renoncourt andMeinesz, 2002) permit
C. racemosa to colonize a habitat very efficiently. This
results in strong modification of habitat structure, particularly
that of macroalgal assemblages. On the SE coast of
Spain and other locations (e.g. Nervi, Italy; Modena
et al., 2000), colonisation by C. racemosa has been mostly
recorded from rocky bottom habitats located in shallow
waters (0.5 m), however, on a wider scale across the Mediterranean
region (e.g. France, Italy and Cyprus) more
extensive spread of the alga have been recorded on soft
bottom habitats in deeper waters (15–20 m) (Argyrou
et al., 1999; Verlaque et al., 2004), and on dead matte of
P. oceanica. Therefore, one would expect that the spread
of C. racemosa will extend to both rocky and soft bottom
habitats, as well as to degraded P. oceanica meadows.
With respect to changes in vegetation resulting from the
presence of C. racemosa, an important reduction in species
richness was recorded in September. On the other hand,
contrary to results from other studies (Piazzi et al., 2001),
species richness was similar between invaded and noninvaded
habitats in March (the colder month), which
implies that some native species colonized the habitat irrespective
of the different species composition and biomass of
benthic vegetation. Some authors have shown that several
years are necessary for the development of dense and continuous
C. racemosa stands (Ruitton et al., 2005); possibly
during the forthcoming years the effects will persist also
during the coldest period at the study area, reducing the
possibility of algae colonization. However, the total
biomass of C. racemosa recorded from our study
(259 g dw m2) is comparable or higher than that recorded
from studies carried out on French and Italian coasts, and
is also higher than values obtained for C. taxifolia and C.
prolifera meadows at some localities (see a review in Capiomont
et al., 2005).
One of the remarkable impacts of C. racemosa is the
accumulation of detritus, which persists throughout the
year. In spite of the important seasonal variability of
C. racemosa biomass, detritus accumulation persist in winter.
The mesh generated by the stolons of this species ensure
that detritus is retained, while the multilayered structure
formed by the thallus traps the sediment (Piazzi et al.,
2001). Detritus values recorded during both seasons were
2–6 times higher than those recorded from native seaweeds.
This accumulation of detritus causes import changes in the
structure of the sediment and in the granulometric compo-
sition (Walker et al., 1991), leading to anoxic conditions in
which toxic substances can be possibly accumulated. On the
other hand, detritus plays a very important role as a trophic
resource for marine invertebrates, being one of the main
trophic pathways of the marine ecosystem (Valiela, 1995)
and is one of the most important features of habitat structure
in vegetated habitats (Allesina et al., 2005). Therefore,
any modification of the detritus compartment can affect the
overall trophic web, because it could lead to a change in the
faunal assemblage structure resulting from modification of
trophic guilds due to different trophic requirements.
With respect to the epifauna, various studies have demonstrated
that modification of habitat complexity affects
crustacean assemblages (Hicks, 1997; Hicks, 1982; Stoner,
1980; Virnstein, 1987; Virnstein and Howard, 1987; Edgar,
1983, 1992; Sanchez-Jerez et al., 1999; Ayala and Martı´n,
2003). In our study, the amphipod assemblages were
affected by changes in habitat structure due to colonisation
by C. racemosa. The total abundance of amphipods was
greater on native seaweeds, mainly in March. However,
the species richness of the amphipod assemblage did not
decrease because of the spread of C. racemosa but because
of an indirect effect; namely the increase in detritus biomass
in invaded habitat resulted in an increase in the abundance
of detritivores species (e.g. A. acutum), and decrease in the
abundance of herbivorous species (e.g. A. ramondi and
H. schmidti), hence resulting in a large overall modification
of the assemblage species composition.
The main modification in amphipod assemblage structure
was manifested as an increase in abundance of A. acutum
in habitat invaded by C. racemosa, which was four
times higher than that of other Corophiidae species in
eutrophic habitats (Guerra-Garcı´a and Garcı´a-Go´mez,
2005). Species belonging to the genus Apocorophium are
tube-dwelling amphipods that inhabit small U-shaped
tubes and are selective deposit feeders (Ciarelli et al.,
1997), and feed on bacteria, algae, and diatoms adsorbed
onto the surface of sediment particles (Meadows and Reid,
1966). Several species of this genus are continuously
exposed to toxicants in the sediment, which they ingest
while feeding (Bat and Raffaelli, 1998), hence they have
been used for sediment toxicity tests. The accumulation
of detritus in habitats invaded by C. racemosa seems to
favour colonization by Corophium spp., resulting in a dramatic
increase in abundance and establishment of a large
population in an altered habitat. Microdeutopus spp. also
showed a small increase in abundance in habitat invaded
by C. racemosa, but the effect was only recorded in September.
This genus is generally associated with P. oceanica and
fine sand habitats (Ruffo, 1982), but in experiments carried
out recently by Roberts and Poore (2005), the family Aoridae
were noted to prefer bare rock with a thin cover of sediment
than an algal substratum. Furthermore, other
taxonomic groups, such as the polychaetes, are favoured
by accumulation of detritus amongst the C. racemosa stolons,
as shown by Argyrou et al. (1999) from their study
carried out in Cyprus.
On the other hand, the abundance of some species, such
as A. ramondi, H. schmidti or Caprella spp., was reduced in
habitat invaded by C. racemosa, since these species have a
preference for native seaweeds (Kocatas, 1976; Russo,
1997; Guerra-Garcı´a and Garcı´a-Go´mez, 2001; Roberts
and Poore, 2005). Other studies have also shown displacement
of A. ramondi resulting from the presence of other
Caulerpa species, e.g. Caulerpa prolifera (Sa´nchez-Moyano
et al., 2001). The displaced species have a close relationship
with seaweeds, as has been demonstrated by Viejo (1999).
In the case of other species, such as L. costae, the effects
of C. racemosa seem to be seasonal, inhabiting habitats
that have a large algal biomass, irrespective of the species
composition.
Comparing the results of the present study with ones on
the effects of C. taxifolia on amphipod assemblages, the
species richness recorded from the latter appears to be
lower (Bellan-Santini, 1995). Furthermore, the effects of
C. taxifolia on the abundance of amphipods also seem to
be more critical (Bellan-Santini, 1995). Such differences
could be due to several factors, such as the species composition
of Caulerpa beds. Stands of C. taxifolia are monospecific,
while in our case; the C. racemosa grew intermixed
with other macroalgal species during both sampling periods.
Consequently, during the initial stages of invasion of
a host habitat by an invasive seaweed, an increment in habitat
complexity will occur if the initial cover is low, hence a
new and additional habitat for the local epifauna becomes
available (Viejo, 1999). However, if growth of the invasive
species continues, leading to a monospecific and dense
meadow, it could lead to impoverishment of the amphipod
assemblage as has been noted for C. taxifolia elsewhere.
Several studies have demonstrated that consequences of
C. racemosa in host systems are very important, particularly
since it appears that this introduced species most invasive
in the Mediterranean Sea (Verlaque et al., 2003). The
presence of C. racemosa in the southeastern coast of Spain
is an incipient problem. It was recorded from Alicante in
2002 and, in less than three years, important changes in
the structure of shallow rocky habitat assemblages
occurred, although to date the distribution of C. racemosa
has been rather patchy, hence its effects are not very widespread
locally. Several years may be necessary for development
of a dense and continuous C. racemosa meadow
(Ruitton et al., 2005); therefore in the near future, one
can expect dramatic changes in rocky bottom habitats,
leading to a direct impact on marine benthic communities
along the western Mediterranean coast. It is therefore very
important to increase our research effort to establish the
ecological implications of the spread of C. racemosa in
the Mediterranean Sea, as this will provide the necessary
information and tools to develop new mitigation and eradication
programs.