xabstract
Many urban ponds in The Netherlands and other countries suffer from eutrophication, resulting in harm- ful algal blooms which are often dominated by cyanobacteria. A sufficient reduction of nutrients, as prerequisite to mitigate cyanobacterial blooms in urban ponds, is not always feasible. Water managers are in need for applicable alternatives to mitigate these cyanobacterial blooms. The quagga mussel (Dreis- sena rostriformis bugensis) is a rapidly expanding bivalve species in many standing waters and rivers in The Netherlands. Because quagga mussels feed on algae, they could become a useful tool in controlling harmful algal blooms in urban ponds if provided with the appropriate substrate. We tested the hypoth- esis that quagga mussels can reduce phytoplankton biomass and induce a clear water state in a shallow hypertrophic urban pond. We executed an in situ enclosure experiment using eight enclosures (750 L) in an urban pond: four enclosures contained quagga mussels (0.3 g ww L−1 ), and four control enclosures were set up without mussels. We used artificial substrate for the breeding of mussels and the trans- fer from the breeding location to the experimental site. In contrast to the controls, the enclosures with mussels showed significantly lower concentrations of total chlorophyll-a (2.4  g L−1 in mussel enclo- sures versus 84.1  g L−1 in controls), cyanobacterial chlorophyll-a (1.0  g L−1 versus 7.3  g L−1 ) and total phosphorus (0.08 mg L−1 versus 0.17 mg L−1 ), and had higher transparency (>0.80 m in mussel enclosures versus 0.57 m in controls) and higher soluble reactive phosphorus concentration (0.03 mg L−1 versus <0.01 mg L−1 ). No effect of the mussels on microcystin concentrations was shown. The results show that quagga mussels are able to reduce the phytoplankton biomass in a hypertrophic urban pond, including cyanobacteria and induce a clear water state. We conclude that quagga mussels can be a promising tool in controlling algal blooms in urban ponds, in particular when a sufficient reduction of nutrients is not feasible. A preferred next step in the scaling up of the method is the determination of long-term effec- tiveness and side-effects in a controlled application in an urban pond. Because the quagga mussel is an invasive alien species, new introductions should be considered carefully and water purification using quagga mussels is preferably applied in water systems where the species is already present.

xintroduction
Eutrophication poses a threat to the water quality of many water bodies (Brönmark and Hansson, 2002; Smith and Schindler, 2009). In urban ponds and lakes, eutrophication often results in harmful algal blooms dominated by cyanobacteria (Downing et al., 2001; Oberholster et al., 2006; Schindler et al., 2008). Regionally this is a common phenomenon, for example in many urban ponds in The Netherlands (Waajen et al., 2014). Cyanobacterial blooms in urban ponds cause a deterioration in water quality. As cyanobacteria are able to produce potent toxins, the blooms pose a risk to human and animal health and impair the values and usages of the water bod- ies involved (Codd et al., 2005; Falconer, 1999; Steffensen, 2008). In mitigating the effects of cyanobacterial blooms, different strate- gies have been applied that intend to decrease the phytoplankton biomass and improve the underwater light climate (Cooke et al., 2005; Gulati and Van Donk, 2002; Hickey and Gibbs, 2009; Jeppesen et al., 2012; Søndergaard et al., 2008). The sufficient reduction in nutrient loading is essential in eutrophication control (Søndergaard et al., 2013). In urban ponds, this often appears to be arduous owing to the nature of the different nutrient sources and of the stake- holders involved (Gulati and Van Donk, 2002). Furthermore, an approach consisting solely of reducing nutrient loading is often not satisfactory, due to the resistance of shallow urban pond- and lake- ecosystems to shifting from an algae dominated turbid state to a macrophyte dominated clear state (Scheffer et al., 1993). In such cases, biomanipulation can be an additional management tool to accelerate the realization of a clear water state (Meijer, 2000). Even in nutrient rich ponds, biomanipulation can induce a clear water state, although the effectiveness may be short-termed (Peretyatko et al., 2009).
In its original concept, biomanipulation is defined as a series of manipulations of the biota of lakes and their habitats to reduce algal biomass and, in particular, cyanobacteria (Shapiro, 1990; Shapiro et al., 1975). In practice, biomanipulation is generally restricted to the removal of benthivorous and zooplanktivorous fish and to the introduction of piscivorous fish in order to stimulate the increase of filter feeding zooplankton, in particular Daphnia (Benndorf, 1995; Jeppesen et al., 2007; Peretyatko et al., 2012). Grazing of zoo- plankton on phytoplankton may help to ‘push’ the system from a turbid to a clear state (Dionisio Pires, 2005). However, the graz- ing capability of zooplankton is limited, due to factors such as predation by invertebrates and juvenile fish, food-limitation and deleterious cyanobacteria (Benndorf et al., 2000; Gulati et al., 2008; Scheffer, 2004). Due to the great need of water managers to mitigate cyanobacterial blooms in urban ponds, attention has been given to the potential of using filter feeding bivalves as additional or alter- native phytoplankton grazers to improve water quality (McIvor, 2004; McLaughlan and Aldridge, 2013; Reeders and Bij de Vaate, 1990).
Early enclosure experiments showed that the introduction of zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha Pallas) increased trans- parency in a temperate hypertrophic shallow lake, and it was suggested that this species could be used for biomanipulation pur- poses to improve lake water quality (Richter, 1986; Reeders and Bij de Vaate, 1990). D. polymorpha, which is native in the Ponto- Caspian area, has spread to large parts of Europe and North America. It reached The Netherlands in 1826 (Kinzelbach, 1992 in Bij de Vaate et al., 2002). In some areas which have been invaded, D. poly- morpha is regarded a nuisance, creating ecological and economic damage (Pimentel et al., 2001; Sousa et al., 2009). Nevertheless, the use of D. polymorpha has been promoted as a potential use- ful organism to control cyanobacterial blooms, including its use in shallow Dutch lakes (Dionisio Pires, 2005; Reeders and Bij de Vaate, 1990). Nowadays, D. polymorpha is widespread in The Netherlands where it is not considered to be a nuisance but improves ecosys- tem function and structure (Dionisio Pires et al., 2005). The related sympatric Ponto-Caspian quagga mussel (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis Andrusov, also referred to as Dreissena bugensis), has first been reported for The Netherlands in 2006 and has spread rapidly. This spread has resulted in a dominance shift from D. polymorpha to D. bugensis at many locations (Matthews et al., 2013; Molloy et al., 2007). D. bugensis is also a suspension feeder that filters water and extracts food consisting of phytoplankton and other food sources as detritus and bacteria from it (Baldwin et al., 2002; Tang et al.,
2013). Until now, D. bugensis did not receive much interest as a potential tool for water management.
Due to the urgent need for effective management tools to con- trol cyanobacterial blooms in urban ponds, Dutch water authorities have become increasingly interested in the use of dreissenids of regional origin as a tool to improve water quality. Despite the long- term and widespread nature of dreissenids in many water bodies in The Netherlands, they do not dominate in urban ponds. Considering the present dominance of D. bugensis over D. polymorpha in areas in The Netherlands, it is of great importance to provide a better insight in the potential of D. bugensis to mitigate cyanobacterial blooms. We hypothesized that the introduction of D. bugensis into a shal- low hypertrophic urban pond would increase water transparency and reduce phytoplankton biomass including harmful cyanobacte- ria. To test this hypothesis, we executed an enclosure experiment in a semi-natural setting in a hypertrophic urban pond, and sup- ported the field experiment with a laboratory assay to gain insight in the effect of feeding activity of D. bugensis on water quality.

xmethods
2.1. Study site
The enclosure experiment was executed from August 20th 2012 (day 0) until September 3rd 2012 (day 14) in a pond in the city of Breda (The Netherlands, N 51◦ 36′ 48′′ /E 4◦ 47′ 30′′ ). The shallow pond (mean water depth ∼1 m) is part of a residential area and is affected by discharges from a separated sewer system, transporting mostly rainwater. The pond contains water throughout the year at a fairly constant level and is used for recreational angling, feeding of ducks and the extraction of irrigation water for allotments. Lawns with scattered groups of deciduous trees surround the pond. The banks of the pond are protected by wooden revetments. The experimental site is in full sunlight during most of the day. It has a sandy bot- tom, covered with a 20 cm layer of mud. Submerged macrophytes and dreissenids are lacking and cyanobacterial blooms (Microcystis sp., Anabaena sp.) occur regularly during the summer. For the lab- oratory assay water from the neighboring pond ‘Linievijver’ was used (The Netherlands, N 51◦ 36′ 00/E 4◦ 46′ 58′′ ), which regularly suffered from cyanobacterial blooms in the past.
2.2. Dreissenids
Dreissenid mussels for the enclosure experiment were grown on a plastic cage (30 × 45 × 64 cm) to provide an appropriate surface for larval settlement (Ackerman et al., 1994). The cage was made up of a three dimensional braid of 3 mm wide plastic strips, pro- viding open spaces of 1.5–2.5 cm. An empty cage was incubated at a water depth of ∼3 m in spring 2011, on the bottom of a reservoir (N 51◦ 58′ 26.5′′ /E 5◦ 14′ 13.4′′ ) with an open connection to the river Rhine, north of the city of Culemborg. The sediment of the reservoir had a large population of D. bugensis. The cage provided a hard sub- strate for mussel larvae to attach to and was completely colonized by dreissenids at the start of the experiment.
2.3. Enclosure experiment
On August 17th 2012 (day −3) eight enclosures were created using transparent perspex cylinders that were positioned at 1 m intervals in a straight line, at a mean water depth of 0.86 m (SE 0.01m). The cylinders had a height of 1.30m and a diameter of 1.05 m. They were pushed into the sediment to a depth of 0.2 m and were open to the sediment and the air. Approximately 750 L of pond water was enclosed in each cylinder. On top they were covered with chicken wire to prevent waterfowl getting in. The mussel cage was retrieved from the breeding reservoir on day 0 and transported to the experimental site within 2 h. The cage was divided into four equal parts (30 × 45 × 16 cm). A similar, empty cage was divided into equally sized parts. On day 0, four enclosures were each stocked with one of the cage-parts colonized with mus- sels, at a water depth of 15–45 cm. The mean wet weight (ww) of the mussel flesh in the enclosures was 0.292 g L−1 (SE 0.020). Four enclosures served as controls and they received a cage part that had no mussels. The position of controls and mussel treated enclosures was randomized.
From each cage-part the ww of mussels was determined at day 0 and at day 14. At the end of the experiment, randomly ∼50% of the fresh mussel-biomass was scrubbed from the cage- parts with a hand brush, and ∼100 specimens were randomly collected from each cage-part. In total 392 specimens were identi- fied. The distinction between D. bugensis and D. polymorpha was based on shell-morphological features (Bij de Vaate and Jansen, 2007). Besides identification of each specimen the shell lengths were measured. From the scrubbed mussels from each enclosure, 10 random samples were taken. Each sample consisted of several hundred mussels. Because the animals were too small to determine the weights of the flesh, we determined the weights of the total ani- mals (flesh + shells). The samples were dried in an oven at 105 ◦ C for 34 h before dry weight (dw) was measured. The samples were then ashed at 550 ◦ C for 3 h and weighed again to determine residue on ignition. To determine the ratio (flesh weight)/(total weight), we collected a second similar crate from the same breeding location on April 23rd 2013. This second crate had been incubated for one year and carried larger and easier to handle animals. From this sec- ond crate, we determined species composition and shell lengths of 309 randomly collected mussels, and the weights of 78 randomly collected individuals of D. bugensis. The ratio (flesh weight)/(total weight) of these mussels was applied to the results of the enclosure experiment, as the data from the second crate revealed no allomet- ric relation of shell lengths (range 2.4–6.5 mm) to the ratio (flesh weight)/(total weight) (Pearson r(9) = −0.064, p = 0.851).
2.4. Fieldsamplingandanalyses
During the experimental period August 20th (day 0) until September 3rd (day 14) 2012 the enclosures and the pond were sampled at days 0, 1, 2, 4, 7, 10, 14. Additionally the pond was sam- pled prior to the setup of the enclosures on August 16th (day −4). On each sampling day, from each enclosure and the pond 10 L water was collected using a sampling tube (whole water column inte- grated samples) and mixed in a 10 L plastic bucket. After mixing, 2–5 sampling bottles with a total content of 3 L were filled with water from the bucket for further analysis. The sampling bottles were transported in a cooled, dark container before being analyzed. The water that was removed from the enclosures by sampling was gradually replaced by seepage through the sediment and no major differences in water levels inside and outside the enclosures were observed during the course of the experiment.
On each sampling date, the Secchi depth was determined using a Secchi disk; pH and oxygen (O2) concentrations of the water were measured using a WTW Multi 350i meter (WTW, Weil- heim, Germany). Chlorophyll-a concentrations (four algae groups: ‘green’ algae – Chlorophyta and Euglenophyta, ‘brown’ algae – Bacillariophyta, Chrysophyta and Dinophyta, ‘blue-green’ algae – Cyanobacteria, ‘red’ algae – Cryptophyta) were measured using a FluoroProbe (Moldaenke bbe, Schwentinental, Germany; Catherine et al., 2012) 4 days before the start of the experiment and on days 0, 2, 4, 7, 10 and 14. Total chlorophyll-a refers to the sum of these four groups. To determine the relation between the results of the FluoroProbe measurements and the regularly used spectrophoto- metric analysis, the chlorophyll-a concentration of each enclosure was analyzed according to NNI (2011) 4 d before the start of the
experiment and on days 0, 7 and 14. Phytoplankton composition and biovolume were microscopically determined on days 0 and 14. Analyses of soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP), total phosphorus (TP), total nitrogen (TN), nitrate (NO3 − ), nitrite (NO2 − ), ammonium (NH4 + ), suspended solids, residue on ignition and microcystins (MCs) were quantified 4 d before the start of the experiment and on days 0, 7 and 14. TP and TN concentrations were analyzed in unfil- tered samples using a continuous flow analyser (Skalar Analytical BV, Breda, The Netherlands) following the Dutch standard protocols according to NNI (2005a, 2005b, 2006). SRP, NO3 − , NO2 − and NH4 + concentrations were analyzed in filtered samples (0.45  m mem- brane filter, Polydisk) by a continuous flow analyser (Skalar) using NNI protocols (NNI, 1997, 2005b, 2006). Suspended solids were col- lected on a 7  m paper filter (Whatman). Dry-weights of the solids were determined after 16 h drying at 105 ◦ C and residue on ignition was subsequently determined after 1.5 h heating at 550 ◦ C accord- ing to NNI (2005c, 2010). Samples for MC analyses were stored at −20 ◦ C until further processing. Concentrations of eight MC vari- ants (dm-7-MC-RR, MC-RR, MC-YR, dm-7-MC-LR, MC-LR, MC-LY, MC-LW and MC-LF) were analyzed using LC–MS/MS as described in Lürling and Faassen (2013). On days 0, 7 and 14 zooplankton was sampled with the sampling tube (whole water column integrated samples). On each date, 25 L from each enclosure was filtered over a plankton net (55  m), and conserved with Lugol’s solution until microscopic analysis of biovolume in each sample.
2.5. Assay
The grazing activity of D. bugensis on a green alga (Scenedesmus obliquus SAG 276/3A), a cyanobacterium (Microcystis aeruginosa NIVA CYA 140) and on a mixture of both was examined in a short laboratory assay. Microcystis aeruginosa NIVA CYA 140 is a single celled strain and a known toxic microcystin producer (Dionisio Pires et al., 2004b). Mussels for the assay were collected on the same breeding location as for the enclosure experiment. The mussels were raked from the sediment on July 16th 2012 using a handnet (mesh 0.5 mm) at a water depth of ∼1.5 m, and were transported to the laboratory within 2h. About 150 mussels (shell lengths 13–20 mm) were identified as D. bugensis and acclimated at 19.0 ◦ C in a container with 10 L unfiltered aerated pond water, originating from the Linievijver pond, under natural light conditions. The mus- sels were daily fed with the green alga S. obliquus, while 50% of the container water was refreshed every 4–5 days with unfiltered pond water from the Linievijver pond.
Scenedesmus obliquus and M. aeruginosa were grown in WC- medium (Guillard and Lorenzen, 1972) as a batch monoculture in 0.5 L Erlenmeyer flasks at 21 ◦ C (±2 ◦ C), with a 16:8 light:dark regime on a rotating shaking table (80 rpm) during three weeks prior to the assay. To minimize the possible influence of the WC- medium on the grazing activity of the mussels, we centrifuged the phytoplankton cultures S. obliquus for 20 min (5180 rcf, Her- aeus Varifuge GL) and M. aeruginosa for 10min (3000 rcf, MSE Harrier 18/80). Sedimented phytoplankton was resuspended in fil- tered (0.45  m, Whatman NC 45) pond water and centrifuged again before used as food for mussels.
24 h before the start of the grazing experiment, the mussels were rinsed under running demineralised water and six mussels were placed in each of 9 glass jars containing 700 mL of filtered pond water (pond Linievijver) to which food (S. obliquus) was added. Jars were placed in a dark incubator at 19 ◦ C on a rotating shaking table set at 80 rpm to keep food in suspension. From experiments with D. polymorpha it is known that dreissenids are not disturbed by shak- ing (Dionisio Pires et al., 2004a). Two h before the start of the assay, the mussels were rinsed again and provided with fresh filtered pond water collected from the Linievijver pond. Just before the assay, the mussels were rinsed again. Then the assay was performed with six mussels held in a container filled with 700 mL filtered pond water taken from the Linievijver pond. The containers were placed on a rotating shaking table set at 80 rpm in a dark incubator at a tem- perature of 19◦C. Depending on the treatment, the mussels were fed solely on S. obliquus (SAG 276/3A at 263  g chlorophyll-a L−1 ), M. aeruginosa (NIVA CYA 140 at 103  g chlorophyll-a L−1 ) or a mix- ture of both (S. obliquus at 90  g chlorophyll-a L−1 , M. aeruginosa at 40 g chlorophyll-a L−1). Each treatment was in triplicate. As a control, the same algal cultures (singular species and mixture) were added in triplicate to containers with filtered pond water which contained six sets of empty D. bugensis shells. The treatments and the controls were run simultaneously during two h. Every 20 min a 2 mL sample was taken from each container for measurement of green algal and cyanobacterial chlorophyll-a using a PHYTO-PAM phytoplankton analyser (Heinz Walz GmbH, Effeltrich, Germany). After two h the mussels were taken out of the containers. To get an indication whether the phytoplankton was actually ingested or incorporated in (pseudo)feces after it had been filtered by the mus- sels, the containers were thoroughly shaken after mussel removal to suspend particles. Immediately after being shaken, the contain- ers were sampled again and chlorophyll-a concentrations were determined. After the grazing experiment, all mussels were rinsed, dried and ashed for determination of the clearance rate (CR) as described below. The weights of the animals were determined as dw and ash-free dry-weight (afdw) of the flesh.
2.6. Dataanalyses
The clearance rate is a measure of the grazing activity of the mussels. It refers to the volume of water from which the mussels have removed all of the food per unit of time (Bunt et al., 1993) and is calculated according to the equation (Coughlan, 1969):
v   C0 C′0  CR=nt∗ LnCt−LnC′t ,
in which CR is the clearance rate (L g dw−1 h−1 , with dw as dry weight of the flesh); V the volume of the container (L); n the dw of the mussel flesh (g); t the time (h); C0 the chlorophyll-a concen- tration ( g L−1 ) in the container with mussels at t = 0 and Ct at t = t; C′ 0 the chlorophyll-a concentration in the controls at t = 0 and C′ t at t = t.
The dependent samples T-test was used to analyze whether the ww’s on day 0 differed from day 14 and to analyze whether the chlorophyll-a concentrations with and without dissolved (pseudo)feces differed. To analyze whether the separate water quality variables of the controls and of the mussel enclosures showed significant differences, we used the independent sam- ples T-test for equality of means. In case requirements for normality or equality of variances could not be fulfilled, we used the Mann–Whitney U-test for equality of medians, with treatment as the grouping variable. The total and cyanobacterial chlorophyll-a concentrations (FluoroProbe) were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVAs. Total chlorophyll-a concentrations were log-transformed to fulfill variance homogeneity require- ments. Cyanobacterial chlorophyll-a concentrations from day 0 were left out as they did not meet the requirement of equal- ity of error variances. We used Greenhouse–Geisser estimates as the assumptions of homogeneity of co-variances were violated (ε<0.75). As the data of the CRs of the assay showed no homo- geneity of variances, we used the Welch test. The analyses were performed in SPSS Statistics 21 (IBM). At p < 0.05 we accepted sta- tistical significance.

xresults
3.1. Enclosureexperiment
The dreissenids used in the enclosure experiment in 2012 consisted of 99.74% of D. bugensis and 0.26% of D. polymor- pha. The characteristics of D. bugensis used in the enclosure experiment as well as D. bugensis collected in 2013 for the deter- mination of weight-ratios, are given in Table 1. The dreissenids collected in 2013 consisted of 97.09% of D. bugensis and 2.91% of D. polymorpha. Considering the abundance of D. bugensis in the dreissenid-composition that was used, we refer to this species when presenting and discussing the results of the enclosure exper- iment.
There is a strong positive correlation between total chlorophyll- a concentrations as measured with the FluoroProbe and spec- trophotometric chlorophyll-a (NNI, 2011), rs = 0.768, p < 0.0005. In the rest of this section we refer to chlorophyll-a as measured with the FluoroProbe. During the experiment, D. bugensis decreased the concen- trations of total chlorophyll-a by 97% (from 81.0 to 2.4  g L−1 ; F1.888, 5.664 = 73.378, p < 0.0005) and of cyanobacterial chlorophyll-a by 72% (from 3.6 to 1.0  g L−1 ; F1.255, 3.766 = 20.120, p = 0.012; Fig. 1, Table 2). On day 0, the phytoplankton community was dominated by the Chlorophyta Volvocales indet. and Actinastrum hantzschii, the Cryptophyta Cryptomonas sp. and the Baccilariophyta Fragilario- phyceae indet. (Table 3). On day 14 the dominating taxon in the controls was Actinastrum hantzschii, and in the mussel enclosures it were Volvocales indet. (Table 3).
After the introduction of D. bugensis, the Secchi depth increased from 0.48 m (day 0) to bottom view (0.82 m) on day 4 (Fig. 2). The pond remained turbid with a Secchi depth between 0.30 and 0.40 m.
 The Secchi depth of the controls ranged from 0.39m (day 1) to 0.56 m (day 14).
Table 2 shows the mean concentrations of water quality vari- ables at the start (day 0) and at the end of the experiment (day 14). Although TP concentrations differed significantly between controls (TP = 0.19 mg P L−1 ) and D. bugensis enclosures (TP = 0.23 mg P L−1 ) at day 0 (t(6) = −4.39, p = 0.005), both means were lower than the concentration in the pond (day 0, TP = 0.35 mg P L−1 ). On day 14 the TP concentration in the D. bugensis enclosures (TP = 0.08 mg P L−1 ) had dropped significantly compared to the controls (TP = 0.17 mg P L−1 ; U = 2.0, p = 0.04). SRP concentrations showed the opposite pattern, at day 14 the concentration in the D. bugensis enclosures (SRP = 0.03 mg P L−1 ) was significantly higher compared to the controls (SRP < 0.01 mg P L−1 ; U = 0.0, p = 0.01). At day 14, TN concentrations did not differ significantly between D. bugensis enclosures (TN=1.38mgNL−1) and controls (TN=1.58mgNL−1;U=5.5,p=0.465),whileNO3− concentrations in the D. bugensis enclosures (NO3 − = 0.18 mg N L−1 ) were signif- icantly higher than in the controls (NO3 − < 0.10 mg N L−1 ; U = 2.0, p=0.04). The controls showed a significantly higher pH at day 14 (pH = 8.7) than the D. bugensis enclosures (pH = 7.9; t(6) = 9.31, p<0.001). A similar pattern was observed for the suspended solids concentration, with higher concentrations in the controls (suspended solids=16mgL−1) than in the D. bugensis enclosures (suspended solids <5 mg L−1 ; U = 0.0, p = 0.01). NO2 − and NH4 + con- centrations were mostly below detection limit (<0.01 mg N L−1 ).
Concentrations of eight microcystin (MC) variants in the pond and in the enclosures were often below the detection limit (Table 4). Total MC concentrations were accordingly low (<1 gL−1), with the highest concentrations found in the pond on day 7 (MC- LR=0.37 gL−1 andMC-RR=0.36 gL−1).The variant MC-LR was detected in the pond on each of the dates, while in the enclosures only MC-LR was detected on days 0 and 7. There is no obvious dif- ference between control and D. bugensis enclosures as MCs were in general not detectable (Table 4).
The mean CR reached a maximum of 1.35 L g−1 dw D. bugen- sis h−1 for the period from day 2 to day 4 and then declined to −0.55 L g−1 dw D. bugensis h−1 for the period from day 10 to day 14 (Fig. 3). All four enclosures showed a similar pattern. During the course of the experiment, the mean ww of the mussels increased from 0.279 g L−1 (SE 0.026) on day 0 to 0.292 g L−1 (SE 0.020) on day 14. Although an increase of ww can be expected and is in accor- dance to results in other studies (Baldwin et al., 2002), in our study the increase is not significant (t(3) = −1.186, p = 0.321). During the course of the experiment, the biovolume of zooplankton declined in all enclosures. The decline in the enclo- sures with D. bugensis was 90%, and 60% in the controls at day 14 (Fig. 4). At day 14 the biovolumes of Copepoda (0.92mm3 L−1) and Cladocera (0.41mm3 L−1) were significantly lower in the mussel enclosures than in the controls (Cope- poda 2.73 mm3 L−1 , t(6) = 4.522, p = 0.004; Cladocera 2.97 mm3 L−1 ; t(6) = 9.430, p < 0.001). All major taxa showed a decline on day 14 in the mussel enclosures compared to the controls, except for copepod nauplii (Table 5).
3.2. Assay
The effect of the feeding activity of D. bugensis on S. obliquus and M. aeruginosa and on a mixture of both was tested in an assay. The mean total chlorophyll-a concentrations dropped from 104 (SE 7) to 28 (SE 10) gL−1 using M. aeruginosa, from 263 (SE 18) to 119 (SE 18)  g L−1 using S. obliquus, and from 40 (SE 2) to 11 (SE 1) gL−1 and from 90 (SE 1) to 63 (SE 5) gL−1 using a mixture (M. aeruginosa and S. obliquus respectively). Although the mean CRs ranged from 2.66 (mixture; SE 0.18) to 3.19 (S. obliquus; SE 0.44) and 6.18 L g−1 dw D. bugensis h−1 (M. aeruginosa; SE 1.75), they did not differ significantly between the three treatments (F2, 3.0787 = 2.080, p = 0.268).
At the end of the assay, the containers were shaken to dissolve particles from (pseudo)feces. Containers with only S. obliquus and containers with the mixture showed a significant increase in mean chlorophyll-a concentrations after being shaken, from 119.4 to 327.0  g L−1 (t(2) = −9.858, p = 0.010) and from 74.2 to 180.0  g L−1 (t(2) = −13.226, p = 0.006) respectively. In the containers with only M. aeruginosa, the mean chlorophyll-a concentration increased after the shaking from 28.0 to 72.1  g L−1 , but the increase was not significant (t(2) = −2.858, p = 0.104).
 
xdiscussion
The crates provided a good breeding substrate for D. bugensis and the mussels survived the transfer from the breeding location to the experimental site. The introduction of D. bugensis reduced the total chlorophyll-a concentrations by 97% and the cyanobac- terial chlorophyll-a by 72% during a 14-day enclosure experiment (Fig. 1). The Secchi depth in the mussel enclosures increased from 0.48 m to >0.82 m within 4 days (Fig. 2). The results of the enclosure experiment support the hypothesis that the introduction of D. bugensis into a shallow hypertrophic urban pond increases the transparency of the water and reduces phytoplankton biomass. The mean total chlorophyll-a concentration reached a minimum of 1.0  g L−1 on day 10 compared to the initial concentration of 81 gL−1 (Fig. 1). The grazing effect of the mussels stretched over the whole enclosure depth, despite the stable water column (Ackerman et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2011). The effect of D. bugensis on chlorophyll-a concentrations in the enclosure experiment was in line with the results from the assay and results from experiments with D. polymorpha in a eutrophic lake (Richter, 1986). In the exper- iment with D. polymorpha (Richter, 1986), transparency increased from 30 cm to >120 cm in 11 days after the introduction of mussels in enclosures in a shallow eutrophic lake. Although D. bugensis and D. polymorpha differ in environmental requirements, CR, and breeding and habitat preferences (Baldwin et al., 2002; Diggins, 2001; Orlova et al., 2005), the effect of the filtering activities is in outline similar as they reduce phytoplankton biomass and increase water clarity (Mida et al., 2010; Vanderploeg et al., 2010). In the laboratory clearance rate experiment we observed a decline of the green alga S. obliquus and of a toxic strain of the cyanobacterium M. aeruginosa in single food species treatments, as well as in mixed cultures. The removal of M. aeruginosa in the mixed cultures (−73% chlorophyll-a within 2 h) is similar to the removal in the sole M. aeruginosa cultures (−73% chlorophyll-a within 2 h). The mean CRs of the sole cultures did not differ significantly from the mean CRs of the mixture. Striking effects of the introduction of D. bugensis in the enclosures in the urban pond were the decline of the seston, the TP concentration and pH, while the concentrations of SRP and NO3− increased. These observations correspond with observations in nat- ural lakes after invasions with D. bugensis and D. polymorpha, where dreissenid filtration activities decreased chlorophyll-a and TP con- centrations (Cha et al., 2013; Mida et al., 2010) when algal cells and other particles were removed. Although D. polymorpha is known for the direct excretion of NH4+ (Gardner et al., 1995), our data show no evidence for such excretion by D. bugensis. At days 0 and 14, all NH4+ concentrations in the treated enclosures and in the controls were below the detection limit (<0.10 mg NH4 + -N L−1 ). On the other hand, we observed that the NO3− concentrations increased significantly in the treated enclosures (Table 2). Mida et al. (2010) mentioned an increase of NO3− after the invasion by D. bugensis in a natural lake. The increase is most likely caused by the decrease of the NO3− utilization by the diminished phytoplankton biomass (Mida et al., 2010), as well as oxidation of NH4 + to NO3 − by bacteria. Conroy et al. (2005) conclude that nitrification influences the phy- toplankton assemblage, as NH4+ is the preferred form of nitrogen for cyanobacteria-taxa such as Anabaena and Microcystis (Dortch, 1990) which often dominate blooms in urban ponds (Waajen et al., 2014). As such, nitrification can contribute to a reduction of the growth of cyanobacteria (Conroy et al., 2005). Increase of the SRP concentrations are caused by dreissenid excretions and less uptake by phytoplankton as the result of grazing loss (Zhang et al., 2011). This internal P loading can enhance the growth of phytoplankton and, stimulated by the increased water clarity, of macrophytes and benthic algae (Higgins et al., 2008). This is supported by our observation of the expansion of filamentous green algae on the mussel cages and on the inside walls of the mussel enclosures.
D. polymorpha is known to promote cyanobacterial blooms in North America, due to the selective rejection of toxic colonial Micro- cystis in pseudofeces (Knoll et al., 2008; Vanderploeg et al., 2001). In Dutch lakes however, Microcystis blooms did not occur after the introduction of D. polymorpha. It has been hypothesized that this
was due to a minimal grazing effect of D. polymorpha in Dutch lakes (Vanderploeg et al., 2001). Knoll et al. (2008) showed a decline of the potentially toxic cyanobacterium Anabaena in lakes with D. poly- morpha. Dionisio Pires et al. (2005) showed that D. polymorpha was able to remove colonial and filamentous cyanobacteria from the water, whether they were toxic or not. Similar to D. polymorpha, D. bugensis is known as a selective filter feeder, being able to graze on Anabaena (Tang et al., 2013). Due to the apparent contradiction in the outcome of these and other studies (e.g. Baker et al., 1998), the effect of the introduction of D. bugensis on the cyanobacteria concentration in a shallow urban pond cannot be predicted unam- biguous on forehand. Our enclosure experiment showed that the cyanobacteria concentration in the mussel enclosures was signif- icantly lower than in the controls, indicating a grazing effect of D. bugensis on cyanobacteria. Despite the absence of fish in the enclosures, naturally present zooplankton failed to reduce the algal biomass in the control enclosures (Fig. 1A). The assay showed that toxic M. aeruginosa and S. obliquus were grazed in single and in mixed cultures. As the grazing activity of the mussels depends not only on food quality but also on particle concentration, the initial differences in algal biomass in the assay might have biased the CR of in particular the single S. obliquus treatment (highest algal biomass) downward as mussels may have experienced a higher food level (Baldwin et al., 2002). Chlorophyll-a from M. aeruginosa and S. obliquus was found in egested material in the assay. This indi- cates that both species can be excluded from ingestion and rejected as pseudofeces (Baker et al., 1998). As pseudofeces can contain viable algal cells (Baker et al., 1998), the pseudofeces may become a potential source for algal regrowth after remobilization into the water column. However, we did not observe a net effect of this in the enclosure experiment, as concentrations of all algae groups decreased in the presence of D. bugensis. In less sheltered, natural situations in urban ponds, resupension of viable algal cells in pseud- ofeces by wave action and bioturbation might become a source of algal regrowth. We did not observe an increase of cyanobacterial toxins in the enclosure experiment, which is in accordance with the low concentration of cyanobacteria in the mussel enclosures. Although MC concentrations in the pond were low, the measured concentrations in the mussel enclosures were lower but not signif- icantly different from the controls.
The mean CR in well mixed cultures in the assay was 2.66 L g dw−1 h−1 . In the presence of a mean of 15.18 g dw D. bugen- sis per enclosure (mean content 750 L) this implies that from an enclosure theoretically all the food particles will be removed in 18.5 h. Due to refiltration of water previously cleared of algae (e.g. by mussels in the center of the crate), inhomogeneity of the sus- pension (Yu and Culver, 1999), and the variation of environmental conditions, the actual removal of algal biomass in the enclosures is slower which is represented in a lower CR in the enclosures (Fig. 3). Algal concentrations in the treated enclosures decreased asymptot- ically (Fig. 1B). After an initial increase of CR, we observed a decrease and hypothesized that the cause was a depletion of food which reduced filtering activity (Horgan and Mills, 1997). At the end of the experiment we observed a negative CR, due to the combined effect of the increase of chlorophyll-a concentration in the mussel enclosures and the decrease in the controls due to fluctuations.
Copepoda and Cladocera biomass decreased under the influ- ence of D. bugensis. During the course of the enclosure experiment, the biovolumes of the larger grazers Daphnia and Bosmina were low in the pond as well in the controls and in the treated enclo- sures, showing that the observed increased transparency is due to the introduction of D. bugensis, rather than to the grazing of zoo- plankton. The reduction of zooplankton in the mussel enclosures, is probably the combined effect of competition for algae and the consumption of small zooplankton by D. bugensis (Kissman et al., 2010; Thorp and Casper, 2002).
Based on the rapid decrease of chlorophyll-a, including cyanobacteria and the increase of transparency related to the intro- duction of D. bugensis, it is obvious that biomanipulation with this species has potential as a tool for water management. Despite small differences in Secchi depths between controls and mussel enclosures at the start of the experiment, the clarifying effect of D. bugensis is evident. Treated enclosures reached bottom view. Meas- ures that create clear water will open a window for submerged macrophytes to establish and support the ‘push’ of the pond into a clear water state. However, as D. bugensis is also known as a detri- mental invasive species, appropriate care should be considered. Uncontrolled spreading of the species in areas where it is absent, should be prevented. Factors to be considered are the intensity and consequences of the algal blooms, the regional and national legislation with regard to algal blooms and to the introduction of species, the current presence of the species in the region, the isolation and natural values of the water body involved, and the feasibility for mitigating eutrophication effects by other means. In controlling algal blooms, the best approach is the structural reduc- tion of nutrient loads in combination with fish stock control and the reconstruction of bathymetry and hydrology. In reality how- ever, this structural approach is not always feasible in urban ponds and there is an urgent need for alternatives. As D. bugensis is widely spread in most of the major basins and catchment areas of The Netherlands, the controlled use of the species as a tool for water management, seems obvious. Despite the spread of D. bugensis in The Netherlands, many urban ponds do not offer the appropriate conditions for such an extensive growth of the mussel population that clarifying effects can be expected. As a wait and see approach in solving the water quality problems of urban ponds is not an option for water managers, active support of the expansion of D. bugensis by its introduction and provision of artificial substrate might offer a way to reduce the harmful algal blooms. Our research showed that the controlled use of D. bugensis can create enough transparency for macrophytes to develop. The artificial substrate that we used supported the breeding of the mussels and the transplantation to the urban pond. On the other hand, literature is not unambiguous with respect to negative effects of dreissenid introductions, and our results contradict the increase of cyanobacteria and MCs that were shown in earlier studies (e.g. Vanderploeg et al., 2001). To make progress in this field, we favor the execution of controlled small scale field experiments with special attention to the state of external nutrient loading, the regeneration of nutrients in the water body, the establishment and growth of macrophytes, fila- mentous algae, and benthic and pelagic cyanobacteria over several seasons and to the duration of effects. Such an approach is preferred over an extended enclosure experiment as it excludes confounding enclosure-effects such as the growth of filamentous green algae on the inside walls of the enclosures and includes the effects of wind,
fish and other (known or unknown) influencing factors. Due to the nature and eutrophic state of many urban ponds, experiments could well be conducted in this water type. The crates that were used provided a suitable substrate for the regional breeding of D. bugensis and for the transfer from the breeding site to the application site in an urban pond. The enclosure experiment showed that the introduction of D. bugen- sis in a hypertrophic urban pond reduced phytoplankton including cyanobacteria and induced a clear water state. This clarity can sup- port conditions for submerged macrophytes to establish, which is essential for the perpetuation of the clear water state. TP concen- trations decreased, while SRP and NO3− concentrations increased. In urban ponds, the introduction of D. bugensis can become a promising tool in controlling harmful algal blooms, in particular in situations where the sufficient reduction of nutrients is not feasible. The next step in the scaling up of the method can be a controlled whole-pond application to determine long-term effects and side- effects. As D. bugensis is an invasive alien species, introductions should be considered with care.
