xabstract


Plant invasion and increased flooding intensity
projected by climate change models can change the soil capacity
of marine wetland to store P. This is a key question to
the nutrient balances and eutrophication processes of coastal
areas, especially in China coastal area that is receiving the
freshwaters of a country in fast economical developing process.
We studied the impact of changes in flooding intensity
and plant invasion on total soil-P concentrations in the
Minjiang River estuarine wetland. Flooding had a weak positive
effect on soil P-fractions concentrations, but this effect
was largely counteracted by the negative effect of salinity. Soil
clay concentration and pH, both of which were related more
with species community composition than with flooding intensity,
were directly related to the P-fraction concentrations.
The replacement of the native mangrove community by the
invasive plant Phragmites australis was related to a decrease
in the soil capacity to store P.Asuitablemanagement tomaintain
this wetland area in optimum conditions to act as a natural
eutrophication buffer should tend to favor mangrove communities
in the new areas that reach more than 220 days y-1
of flooding, and a combination of the three tall-grasses communities
below this level of flooding


xintroduction


Phosphorus (P) is a crucial element for all living organisms.
Next to nitrogen (N), P is the nutrient that most commonly
limits plant production in the terrestrial biosphere (Margalef
1997; Aerts and Chapin 2000). Several drivers of global
change such as N eutrophication, changes in soil use, species
invasion or climate change currently have serious impacts on
the P cycle and P imbalances and other important bioelemental
cycles, such as that of N (Sardans et al. 2006; PeÒuelas et al.
2012 and 2013). The question now arises whether or not P and
its imbalances with other nutrients can alter the capacity of
Earth to fix C from anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide
(PeÒuelas et al. 2013).
Global warming is affecting ocean levels through its impacts
on the global water cycle (Schewe et al. 2011;
Mendelsohn et al. 2012; Piecuch and Ponte 2014), and nutrient
stoichiometry (Sardans et al. 2012a; Sardans and PeÒuelas
2014a, b). These effects of global warming can further affect
the global P cycle and its stoichiometric relationships with
other nutrients, which can then affect community structure
and function (Sterner and Elser 2002; Sardans et al. 2012b;
PeÒuelas et al. 2012 and 2013).
The increase in ocean levels could be especially critical for
wetland ecosystems (Ramsar 2013). Flooding in these important
ecosystems can alter soil contents and the stoichiometric
relationships of C, N, P, and sulfur (S) by changing the
aerobic/anaerobic biogeochemical equilibrium, nutrient inputs
and outputs, and/or the structures of plant communities
(Steinman et al. 2012; Recha et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2013),
and by altering water flow and fluxes (Zak et al. 2008;
McCray et al. 2012). Wetlands are also frequently affected
by other drivers of global change such as species invasions
that can interact with the increase in flooding duration and
intensity to change the capacity of wetlands to store P
and/or to change the proportions of different soil-P fractions.
Moreover, the expected increase of typhoon events
will increase the flood time, water table, soil salinity and
anoxic conditions. Furthermore, typhoon events increase
litterfall and nutrient cycling in plant-soil system (Wang
et al. 2015c).
Estuaries and marshes are sinks for the wastewater from
human activities that frequently contain high concentrations
of P loaded to rivers (Mustafa and Scholz 2011; Wang et al.
2012). Despite the high priority at a global scale of wetland
restoration (Mustafa and Scholz 2011; Dunne et al. 2011; Zak
et al. 2014), wetlands restored on former agricultural land
could potentially release accumulated P and become a source
of eutrophication (Kjaergaard et al. 2012; Kinsman-Costello
et al. 2014). Under increasing intensities of flooding, we
should expect higher levels of anoxic conditions, under
which increased Fe3+ reduction could increase the release
of P from Fe3+ phosphates (Zak et al. 2008; Kjaergaard et al.
2012).
Invasions of alien plant species are currently increasing
and are a serious threat to global plant diversity (Vitousek
et al. 1987; Funk and Vitousek 2007). Most studies that
have investigated alien success have identified nutrient
availability and the competitive capacities of nutrient uptake
and of coping with low levels of nutrients as the key
factors accounting for the success of the alien species
(Sardans and PeÒuelas 2012a, 2012b; Drenovsky et al.
2012). Moreover, alien plants frequently alter soil nutrient
concentrations and availability, the decomposition of organic
matter, nutrient cycling, and soil stoichiometry (Sardans
and PeÒuelas 2012a, 2012b; Drenovsky et al. 2012).
Invasive plant species, such as the common reed,
Phragmites australis, are spreading in several Chinese wetlands
(Tong et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2015a). The success of
P. australis has been associated with its higher nutrient-use
efficiency and up-take capacity than native species (Wang
et al. 2015a). We hypothesized that increased flooding
could have an impact on its invasive success and its interactions
with plant-soil P-cycle, which in turn could affect
the effect of flooding intensity on the status of soil P in
wetlands.
China coastal areas receive great amounts of P (Sharpley
and Wang 2014; Gao et al. 2015; Li et al. 2015), that have
increased by a factor of 2ñ5 in the period 1970ñ2000 and
threaten to increase additional 30ñ200 % towards 2050
(Strokal et al. 2014). We hypothesized that total P and Pfractions
in soil will change in function of flooding intensity
and plant community, and therefore the increase or decrease of
wetlands capacity to act as a P sink or source in the next
decades can be projected in an scenario of flooding enhancement
and reduction of wetland surface and enlighten the management
possibilities of improving such capacity.
We studied soil-P concentrations under different flooding
gradients and under the absence/presence of an invasive species
in the Minjiang River estuarine tidal wetland to clarify
their effects on P concentrations and fraction variations. We
aimed to answer the questions: (i) how do increased flooding
and different plant communities, including a successful invasive
plant species, affect the concentrations and contents of
total soil P and the soil P fractions, and (ii) which physicochemical
soil properties are involved in these effects?


xmethods



Study Areas
This study was conducted in the Minjiang River estuarine
wetland in southeastern China, in the transition zone of the
mid-subtropical and south subtropical zones (25∞50'43?-26∞9'
42?N, 119∞5'36?-119∞41'5?E). The estuary has an area of
476 km-2 and a relatively warm and wet climate, with a mean
annual temperature of 19.7 ∞C and a mean annual precipitation
of 1346 mm (Liu et al. 2006). Many wetlands are distributed
in the estuary and along the river. We conducted three experiments
in this study (Fig. 1).
(1) P. australis and the native sedges Scirpus triqueter L. and
Cyperus malaccensis var. brevifolius Boeckeler are the
plant species that dominate the land surface in the
Shanyutan wetland and are typically found in the upper
(mid to high) portions of mudflats (Liu et al. 2006).
These three species can grow in both high-flood and
low-flood habitats.We established an experimental setup
in this wetland at two flooding intensities and with three
species communities. The flooding in the studied areas is
based on the tide flood, and therefore depends on the
distance to sea. Changes in river flow are also important
to control the flood, but the main responsible of the differences
of flooding intensity across different wetland
areas is sea tidal. The high-flood habitats are flooded
by intermediate tides ca. 240 d y-1 and are submerged
beneath 10ñ120 cm of water for 0.5ñ4 h during each tidal
inundation. The areas occupied by each species were ca8, 9, and 18 hm2 for S. triqueter, C. malaccensis, and
P. australis, respectively. The low-flood habitats are
flooded only during spring tides, ca. 80 d y-1, and are
submerged beneath 10ñ50 cm of water for 0.5ñ2 h during
each tidal inundation. The areas occupied by each
species were ca. 7, 12, and 6 hm2 for S. triqueter,
C. malaccensis, and P. australis, respectively. The soil
surfaces of both the low- and high-flood habitats of the
entire estuarine wetland are exposed at low tide, but the
soil remains flooded in some low areas.We analyzed two
flooding intensities ◊ three communities ◊ six soil layers
◊ three replicates, for a total of 108 samples. With this
experiment we analyzed how different flood intensities
are related with differences in soil P concentrations and
P-fraction in soils under each one of the three tall-grasses
depending on flooding intensity.
(2) Communities of the invasive P. australis in the Shanyutan,
Bianfuzhou, and Youxizhou wetlands were selected as
high-flood, intermediate-flood, and low-flood habitats,
respectively, from the coast inland to test the effects of
flooding intensity on the total soil-P concentration and
content and different P fractions. The high-flood habitat
(Shanyutan wetland) is flooded by tides ca. 240 d y-1 and
is submerged beneath 10ñ120 cm of water for 0.5ñ4 h
during each tidal inundation. The intermediate-flood
habitat (Bianfuzhou wetland) is flooded by tides ca.
220 d y-1 and is submerged beneath 10ñ100 cm of water
for 0.5ñ3 h during each tidal inundation. The low-flood
habitat (Youxizhou wetland) is flooded by tides ca.
180 d y-1 and is submerged beneath 10ñ70 cm of
water for 0.5ñ1.5 h during each tidal inundation.
We analyzed three flood intensities (the high-flood
intensity was the same as that in the first experiment
for P. australis) ◊ one community ◊ six soil layers ◊
three replicates, for a total of 54 samples (36 were
different from those in the first experiment). With this study we analyzed whether or not soils under the invasive
species P. australis have different P and P-fractions
concentrations at different levels of flooding intensity.
(3) P. australis in the Shanyutan wetland subjected to highflood
intensity has invaded the wetland over the past
30 years and is now the most prevalent plant species
occupying the natural habitat of the native mangroves.
P. australis has spread occupying sites that previously
were covered by mangrove communities. Mangroves
had not a high density, and humans tend to reduce its
density and to allow P. australis spreading. We investigated
and compared total soil-P concentration and content
and different P fractions in the P. australis communities
and in the natural mangrove habitat in this highflood
habitat. We analyzed one flooding intensity
(high) ◊ two communities (the data for P. australis were
the same as for the high-flood intensity in the first
experiment) ◊ six soil layers ◊ three replicates, for a total
of 36 samples (18 were different from those in the first
experiment). With this experiment we analyzed the differences
in P and P-fractions concentrations between the
invasive P. australis tall-grass and the native mangrove
community in the current wetland areas submitted to the
high levels of flooding intensity. Collection and Analysis of Soil Samples
Soil samples were collected in October 2007 from the
S. triqueter, P. australis, C. malaccensis, and mangrove communities
in the high- and low-flood habitats. Three replicate
plots were randomly established in each community at each
flooding intensity. Soil profiles (width, 1 m; length, 1 m; depth,
0.6 m) were excavated, and samples were collected with a
small sampler (length, 0.3 m; diameter, 0.1 m) from each of
six soil layers (0ñ10, 10ñ20, 20ñ30, 30ñ40, 40ñ50, and 50ñ
60 cm) at the centers and both sides of the soil pits. These three
samples were bulked to form one sample per layer. A total of
162 soil samples were thus collected (108 for the first experiment
plus an additional 36 and 18 samples for the second and
third experiments, respectively). In the laboratory, the samples
were air-dried, roots and visible plant remains were removed,
and the soil was finely ground in a ball mill.
Soil P Analyses
Total P (TP) and total inorganic P (Pi) concentrations were
determined following the method described by Ruban et al.
(1999) (see Appendix 1 in Supplementary Information for
details).
Total organic P (Po) concentrations were determined by
rinsing the residual soil in the above centrifuge tubes twice
with 12 ml of deionized water, freeze-drying, ultrasonicating
in a bath for 30 s, ashing for 3 h at 450 ∞C, transferring
to 100-ml centrifuge tubes after cooling, adding 20 ml of
3.5 mol L-1 HCl, mixing on the QHZ-98A oscillator at
250 rpm for 16 h at 25 ∞C, and then centrifuging at
2000 g for 15 min. The P concentrations of the supernatants
were determined colorimetrically as for Pi.
We used the continuous extraction procedure of Lu (1999)
to determine the P concentrations in the labile Po, moderately
labile Po, moderately resistant Po, and highly resistant Po
fractions (see Appendix 1 in Supplementary Information for
details). We used the continuous extraction procedure of
Ruban et al. (1999) to determine the P concentrations in the
exchangeable Pi, Fe ± Al Pi, and Ca Pi fractions.
Residual Pi P concentration was determined by:
Ωresidual Pi º ΩTPñΩexchangeable PiñΩFe ˛ Al PiñΩCa PiñΩtotal Po:
Determination of Other Soil Parameters
Total S concentrations were determined by method of Lu
(1999) (see Appendix 1 in Supplementary Information for
details).
Soil bulk density was measured from three 5 ◊ 3 cm cores
per soil layer (Wang et al. 2014), salinity was measured with a
DDS-307 conductivity meter (Boqu Scientific Instruments,
Shanghai, China), pH was measured with an 868 pH meter
(Orion Scientific Instruments, USA), soil particle-size (clay,
silt, and sand) contents were determined with a SEDIMAT4-
12 particle size analyzer (UGT Scientific Instruments,
M¸ncheberg, Germany), and soil-water content was determined
gravimetrically (Lu 1999).
Determination of Soil C, N, and P Storage
The C, N, and P storages for all soil layers were estimated by
following Mishra et al. (2010):
Cs ºX
n
jº1
cm  ?b
 D
where CS is C, N, or P storage (kg m-2), j is the soil-depth
interval (1, 2, Ö n; 0ñ10, 10ñ20, 20ñ30, 30ñ40, 40ñ50, and
50ñ60 cm) cm is the C, N, or P concentration (g kg-1), ?b is the
bulk density (kg m-3), D is the thickness of each soil layer (m),
and n is the number of soil layers.
Statistical Analyses
The statistical significance of differences in the soil parameters
among the flooding intensities and soil layers in the communities
was assessed with general linear models and Tukeyís post-hoc tests. We determined the Pearson correlation coefficients
among all pairwise soil studied parameters. We also
determined the effects of water content and species on N and
P storage. All univariate statistical analyses were performed
using SPSS 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA).
We performed multivariate discriminant function analysis
(DFA) to determine the importance of total C, N, P, and S
concentrations; DOC, NH4
+, NO3
-, and available-S concentrations;
exchangeable Pi, Fe + Al Pi, Ca Pi, residual Pi, labile
Po, moderately labile Po, moderately resistant Po, and highly
resistant Po concentrations; exchangeable Pi:labile Po and total
Pi/Po ratios; and total C:N, C:P, N:P, C:S, N:S, and P:S
ratios in the separation of the chemical components of the soil
in the plots at different flooding intensities for the three species
(Raamsdonk et al. 2001). The DFAs were performed using
Statistica 6.0 (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, USA). All nutrient ratios
were calculated in mass basis.
We performed structural equation modelling to determine
the best model for explaining the TP concentration, exchangeable
Pi concentration, the exchangeable Pi:labile Po ratio, the
total Pi:Po ratio, and the recalcitrant P concentration (endogenous
variables) as functions of the flooding intensity (as a
dummy variable), and the other soil traits such as soil salinity,
pH and clay concentrations (exogenous variables). This analysis
provided information for the direct, indirect and total
effects of the exogenous variables on the endogenous variables
and allowed us to determine the direct and indirect relationships
of exogenous variables on endogenous variables.
For example the direct effect of flooding intensity on total soil
P concentrations can be distinguished from the indirect effect
of flooding on total soil P due to the effect of flooding intensity
on salinity that thereafter has an effect on soil total P concentration.
We fitted the models using the sem R package (Fox
et al. 2013) and achieved the minimum adequate model using
the Akaike information criterion (AIC). Standard errors of the
effects were extracted by bootstrapping (1200 repetitions)
(Davison et al. 1986; Mitchell-Olds 1986).

xresults

Effects of Flooding, Soil Physicochemical Traits
and Species on Soil-P Pools (Experiment 1)
Flooding increased soil P concentrations of all studied Pi and
Po fractions in the S. triqueter community but not in soils
under the communities dominated by the other two species:
the other native species, C. malaccensis and the invasive species
P. australis that did not change P concentrations under
higher flooding duration (Fig. 2, Table S1).The results of the
repeated measures ANOVA (in space) are very similar to
those of the GLM analysis of the flooding effect on the variables
shown in Fig. 2 (Table S1). In the GLM analyses with
flooding duration, species and soil depth as independent categorical
variables, only the Fe + Al P pools differed, with the
Fe + Al Pi pool being higher and the Fe + Al Po (moderately
labile) pool lower for C. malaccensis than for P. australis
(Table S2). This asymmetrical effect of increased flooding
dependent on species is clearly shown by the PCA with all
soil variables, where the PC1 scores for the S. triqueter soils
subjected to low flooding are very different than those for all
other soils (Fig. 3). The PCA indicated that bulk density, sand
content, and the total Pi:Po ratio were higher in the S. triqueter
soils subjected to low flooding (Fig. 3).
Bulk density was lower (higher silt and lower sand contents)
under high flooding intensity, and soil-water content,
salinity, and C and N concentrations were higher (Table S2).
We observed a significant interaction flooding intensity x species,
due to that these effects were particularly observed for
S. triqueter soils and much less in the other two species.
Higher NH4
+ and lower NO3
- concentrations were found at
high flooding than at lower flooding intensities (Table S2). TP
concentration and the concentrations of most P pools were
positively correlated with clay and silt contents, total C and
N concentrations, DOC concentration, and NO3
- concentrations
and negatively correlated with sand content, bulk density,
and S concentration (Table S3). These correlations were
stronger in Pi fractions than in Po fractions. Consequently,
clay and silt contents and total C, N, and DOC concentrations
were negatively correlated with the total Pi/Po ratio, and sand
content and bulk density were positively correlated with the
total Pi:Po ratio (Figure S1). These effects were mainly due to
the large differences between the S. triqueter soil under low
flooding intensity and all other soils (Figure S1).
The total N:P ratios were higher under flooding in the wetlands
of the three species at most soil depths (Table S2, Fig. 4).
Moreover, this ratio was highest for the invasive P. australis
soils (Table S2, Fig. 4).
The structural models that best explained (lower AIC)
the different P fractions and their Pi:Po ratios are shown
in Figs. 5, 6 and 7. The best model for TP and exchangeable Pi
(Fig. 5) concentrations showed that clay content and soil pH
had direct positive significant effects on these P variables and
that flooding had an indirect negative effect through its positive
effect on salinity that subsequently had a negative effect
on these P variables (Figs. 5, 6 and 7).
The best structural model for total recalcitrant P (Pi + Po)
and total Po concentrations indicated a direct effect of clay
content but not of soil pH, while an indirect effect of flooding
by increasing salinity was also observed (Figs. 6 and 7). This
relationship is consistent with the expected according to clay
properties. The indirect negative effect of flooding on the
exchangeable Pi:labile Po ratio was best explained by the
direct effect of flooding on higher total S concentrations
that subsequently had a negative effect on the exchangeable
Pi:labile Po ratio (Fig. 7).
 Soil pH and mainly clay content thus had strong positive
relationships with P-fraction concentrations, and these effects
were stronger in the Po than the Pi fractions, and both consequently
decreased the total and exchangeable Pi:labile Po ratios
(Figs. 5 and 7). Flooding had no significant direct effects
on clay content or soil pH. These results were consistent with
those of previous univariate analyses where the variability of
clay content and soil pH were slightly related with flooding
intensity when comparing overall soils. The relationships between
clay content and soil pH with flooding intensity were
positive in soils under S. triqueter and negative in soils under
the other two species (Fig. 8).
Effects of Flooding on the Soil-P Pools in the Invasive
P. australis Communities (Experiment 2)
The P. australis soil in the mid-flood habitat had the highest
TP concentrations and stored more P, mainly in the upper
30 cm of the soil, relative to the low- and high-flood habitats
(Fig. 9a and 9l), due mainly to the high concentrations of the Pi
pools (Fig. 9 b-e). The exchangeable Pi:total P ratio in the upper
30 cm of soil were higher in the mid- than the low- and highflood
habitats dominated by this invasive species (Fig. 9m). The
PCA with all soil variables indicated that PC1 (explaining
44.7 % of the total variance) significantly (P < 0.05) separated

 the scores of the stands of P. australis growing under the three
flooding intensities. The concentrations of the Po pools increased
from soils under low flooding to soils under high
flooding intensities, coinciding with a decrease in sand content
and bulk density and with an increase in clay and silt contents
(Fig. 10). Interestingly, the PC2 scores (explaining 27.2 % of
the total variance) for the soils in the mid-flood habitat differed
significantly from the scores for the soils in the low- and highflood
habitats (P = 0.004 and P = 0.0001, respectively)
(Fig. 10). PC2 was significantly loaded by TP concentration,
total P stored in the soil, and all Pi pools, with the soil in the
mid-flood habitat placed toward the highest values and coinciding
with lower C:P ratios (Fig. 10). Increased flooding was
associated with an increase in total N:P ratios (Fig. 11).
Differences in Soil P Contents Between Mangrove
and Communities Dominated by the Invasive P. australis
(Experiment 3)
Mangrove soils accumulated more P in the upper 10 cm of the
soil than the P. australis soil at the same flooding intensity
(Fig. 12). The mangrove soils had higher bulk densities, sand
contents, pHs, salinities, and NO3
- concentrations and lower
water contents, silt contents, total C and N concentrations, and
total N:P ratios than the P. australis soils (Table S4). The P
stored in the upper 60 cm of soil were marginally significantly
(P = 0.08) higher in the mangrove soils than the P. australis
soils (Table S4).
The PCAwith all soil variables indicated that the scores of
the mangrove soils were significantly (P < 0.0001) separated
from those of the P. australis soils along the PC1 axis
(explaining 31.2 % of the total variance) (Fig. 13). This axis
was significantly loaded by sand content, bulk density, pH,
salinity, P storage, water content, and NH4
+ concentration,
with the mangrove scores placed toward higher pH, P storage,
sand content, bulk density, and salinity and toward lower water
content and NH4
+ concentration (Fig. 13).
xdiscussion

Flooding Effects Versus Species Effects on the Status
of Soil P
The relationships of flooding and the P pools were very asymmetrical,
depending on the species. Despite we did not can
disentangle if differences in soils P concentrations in soils
under the different species were the cause or the effect of the presence of these species, the P pools changed most in the
soils depending on the flooding intensity in the native
S. triqueter wetlands than in the sites dominate by the other
two studied species. These differences may be related, at least
partially, to the very much lower biomass of the S. triqueter
community than those of the C. malaccensis and P. australis
communities (Wang et al. 2015b).The TP concentrations of
ca. 0.7 g kg-1 in the first few centimeters of soil in these
wetlands were within the range of 0.3ñ1.3 g kg-1 observed
in marine and estuarine wetland areas around the world
(Carol et al. 2012; Xu et al. 2012; Irick et al. 2013; Gao
et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2014).The concentrations of most P
fractions abruptly decreased at a depth of 30 cm. Most of the
P was stored in the first few centimeters of the soil profiles, as
in other wetland areas (Wang et al. 2011; Gao et al. 2014).
These areas are thus very vulnerable to P losses from any
disturbance that could pose a potential risk of an increase in
P in the water column, and consequently its potential export to
coastal areas.
Flooding increased TP accumulation, several P fractions,
and the exchangeable Pi:labile Po ratio, but these effects were
partially counteracted by the indirect effects of flooding on
soil salinity and total S concentration, because these variables
had negative effects. Clay content and soil pH, however, were mostly associated with the various soil P fractions concentrations
that in turn were more related with the dominant species
and with the interaction between species and flooding than
with flooding intensity alone. Most of the variability of
the P concentrations was explained by the variation of
the clay contents of the S. triqueter communities, which
were lowest under lower flooding intensity, along with the
lowest concentrations of all P fractions and especially the
Po fractions. Higher clay contents were associated with
higher sulfur concentrations (under high redox potential of
the media) and lower soil pHs, consistent with the higher
anoxic conditions expected in soils with high clay contents
(Miller et al. 2001; Oxmann et al. 2009). The unique important
and general effect of flooding intensity on the P fractions
was due to its effect on soil salinity. Pore-water salinity in
wetlands has been associated with flooding intensity and thus
with species composition and P concentration (Mendoza et al.
2012). These associations may be due to the effects of soil
salinity on plant P uptake and thus on the P concentrations
and contents in the leaves and litter, together decreasing
the capacity of P retention in the ecosystem with increasing
salinity (Mendoza et al. 2012). In our studied sites, settling rates depend partially of the
number of hours of flooding. Thus the longer times that water
covers the soil as flooding intensity increases should permit
higher particle sedimentation, which should be more relevant
for clay particles than for the larger sand particles. Moreover,
higher clay contents and anoxic conditions should produce
lower pHs. But higher flooding intensity was associated with
higher clay contents, within the range of flooding intensities of
this study only in the wetlands dominated by S. triqueter. Our
results, thus, suggested that soil clay content could be related
with the specific-species cover at some extend. Anyway, the
study design was not aimed to disentangle whether the high
clay soil concentrations under S. triqueter in specially at high
flooding intensity is a cause of the occurrence of this species
in rich-clay soils or they are the consequence of the
existence of this species increasing the capacity to trap clay
particle. In another study, exchangeable Pi increased and
labile Po decreased under flooding (Newman and Pietro 2001).
The clay concentrations were negatively correlated with the total
(R2 = 0.44, P < 0.00001) and exchangeable Pi:labile Po ratios
(R2 = 0.22, P < 0.00001), suggesting that Po mineralization was
hindered by high clay contents. Clay content was also negatively
correlated with soil pH, but this relationship was not associated
with flooding intensity; soil pH was thus not clearly associated
with flooding. In contrast to the expected decrease in pHwith the
more anoxic soil conditions under higher flooding intensity,
some studies have observed that soil pH increased with flooding
intensity (Saint-Laurent et al. 2014).
Previous studies in wetlands have also reported relationships
between clay content and P storage (Chapuis-Lardy
et al. 2006; McGrody et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2013), due
mostly to high Fe-Al P and Ca P fractions and to the higher
adsorption capacity of the soil, because high clay contents
provide more solid and large surface per unit weight (Wang
et al. 2013). In fact, and consistent with these observations, the
Fe + Al Po fraction was the fraction best correlated with clay content (R2 = 0.62). Our results thus demonstrate that these
effects were mainly related to the species, despite the effects of
flooding intensity on the P fractions in the soil profile.
Xu et al. (2012) have also suggested that the vegetation
could significantly influence P dynamics and availability
in the Yellow River delta. However, we can not disentangle
whether the different soil texture under the different
studied species-communities is the cause or the
effect of these species distribution.
The concentrations of TP and in the P fractions mostly
did not differ significantly between the P. australis and
C. malaccensis soils. We only observed differences in the
Fe + Al P fractions, with higher Fe + Al Pi and lower Fe +
Al Po concentrations in the C. malaccensis soils, consistent
with the slightly higher rates of litter mineralization observed
in C. malaccensis soils than in P. australis soils (Tong et al.
2011). The lack of general differences in the status of soil P
between these two species was consistent with the small differences
in litter elemental composition in the same wetlands
(Tong et al. 2011). But despite the little differences observed
in litter composition, we have observed some stoichiometrical
differences between these two species in litter C:P (555 ± 1
and 473 ± 1, P < 0.0001, respectively) and N:P (12.8 ± 0.04and 10.3 ± 0.12, P < 0.0001, respectively) ratios. These results
are consistent with some observed results regarding soil P.
For example, the lower soil recalcitrant Po and higher
labile Pi/Po ratio in soils under P. australis than in soils
under C. malaccensis suggest higher decomposition rates
of organic P consistent of litter with lowerN:P ratio related with
higher microbial growth rates and activity such as expected in
the frame of ecological stoichiometry approach (Mooshammer
et al. 2012; Zechmeister-Bolstenstern et al. 2015). Differences Among Species of Flooding Effects on P Status
Concentrations in the Pi fractions in the upper 30 cm of the
P. australis soils were higher at the highest flooding intensity
than at the lowest and intermediate flooding intensities,
whereas concentrations in the Po fractions were lowest at
the lowest flooding intensity. The TP stored in soil and
the exchangeable Pi:TP ratio in the upper 30 cm of soil
were both highest at the intermediate flooding intensity.
The intermediate flooding intensity thus produced the
highest accumulation of P and the highest proportion of
plant-available P in the P. australis soils. The biomass of
the invasive P. australis was thus higher than those of
S. triqueter and C. malaccensis (P < 0.05) in the highflood
habitat but was only higher than that of S. triqueter
(P < 0.05) in the low-flood habitat (Wang et al. 2015b).
The higher exchangeable Pi: labile Po ratio in the upper
30 cm of soil at the intermediate flooding intensity in the
P. australis wetlands suggested that the mineralization
rates would be higher at the intermediate flooding intensity,
within the range tested in this study.
The N:P ratios in the P. australis soils increased with
flooding intensity, as also observed when comparing the three
species at two flooding intensities. A higher N:P ratio should
mitigate the N limitation observed in other studies in this same
wetland area (Wang et al. 2014). N:P ratios of 5.4ñ5.7 have
been considered as indicating that a wetland is a P sink
(Jimenez-Carceles and Alvarez-Rogel 2008). The range of
the total N:P ratio (0.5ñ3) in this wetland area is thus very
low, and N is also probably limiting at the highest flooding
intensity. Our results thus also suggest that these wetlands are
strong P sinks, with consequently low N:P ratios, and that the
N:P ratio increases at higher flooding intensities with increases
in N accumulation and not by decreases in P content.
The capacity to store P at different flooding intensities is a key
question in the estuarine wetlands of China, because cropland
soils have very high P concentrations (MacDonald et al. 2011;
Wang et al. 2014), consistent with the large amount of P stored
in this estuarine area. This capacity to store P is even more
crucial in the wetlands of subtropical China, where the
high temperatures produce high rates of P mineralization
(Rui et al. 2012) and the strong rains cause severe erosion in
the river basins, which increase the transport of P from upriver
to estuarine areas (Tian et al. 2010).
Our results thus suggest that the best management strategy
for maximizing the capacity of this wetland area to act as a P
sink should favor the combination of C. malaccensis and
P. australis wetlands in areas of low flooding intensity
(<180 d y-1 inundation) and the combination of S. triqueter,
C. malaccensis, and P. australis wetlands in areas of
intermediate-high flooding intensities (>180 d y-1 inundation).
Effects of Mangrove and P. australis Wetland on the Status
of Soil P
In contrast with the previous results suggesting a closer positive
relationship between clay content and the different P fractions,
especially the Po fractions, the sandier soils in the mangrove
community stored higher amounts of P in the upper
10 cm of soil than the less dense soil in the P. australis wetlands
at similar flooding intensities. The higher soil density in
the mangrove community allowed a higher total accumulation
of P, despite the higher P concentration in the P. australis
community. This capacity may thus be responsible for the
large structural difference between these two communities.
Mangrove ecosystems have a large capacity to retain soil nutrients
(Tam and Wong 1996; Silva et al. 1998). The slow
decomposition of wood in the upper soil layers could play a
large role in this capacity (Romero et al. 2005). Nielsen and
Andersen (2003) observed that P in the Bangrong mangrove forest in Thailand tended to be concentrated in the leaf litter
during decomposition, which was associated with the high P
concentrations in the soils. These results suggest that the
maintenance of native mangrove communities to act as P
sinks is the best management strategy in wetland areas with
high flooding intensities (>220 d y-1 inundation). Our results
strongly suggest that the best management strategy that
would both preserve biodiversity and maximize the capacity
of the wetland area to act as a P sink for future scenarios o
rise in flooding duration, should favor the combination of
C. malaccensis and P. australis wetlands in areas with low
flooding intensity (<180 d y-1 inundation), the combination
of S. triqueter, C. malaccensis, and P. australis wetlands in
areas with intermediate flooding intensity (180ñ220 d y-1
inundation), and the maintenance of native mangrove communities
in areas with high flooding intensities (>200 d y-1
inundation). In fact, this wetland area has been recently declared
as National Reserve and some of the current mangrove
areas have been planted by China government. This study thus
shows the positive results of this policy of repopulation of
native mangrove communities in the higher flooded areas to
rise the capacity to store P in soil and to avoid eutrophication.
Conclusions
Flooding moderately increased TP accumulation, P concentrations
in several P fractions, and the exchangeable Pi:labile
Po ratio. Some indirect effects of flooding, such as increases in
soil salinity and total S concentrations, contributed to the moderation
of the relationship between flooding and the P fractions
by counteracting the direct positive relationship with
flooding. This moderation occurred because these variables
were negatively correlated with total P accumulation, P concentrations
in several P fractions, and the exchangeable
Pi:labile Po ratio.
We observed an interaction between species and flooding
on the total-P and P-fraction concentrations. The relationship
between flooding and higher P-fraction concentrations
depended on the species community. The principal cause of
this relationship was the relationship of each species with the
increase in clay content as flooding increased. Clay content
was the soil variable most positively correlated with the various
P-fraction concentrations and was more dependent on the
dominant species than on the flooding intensity alone.
Higher clay contents were correlated with higher S concentrations
and lower pHs, consistent with the higher anoxic conditions
expected in soils with higher clay contents. Clay content
was also correlated with a higher adsorption capacity. All
these soil conditions at high clay contents are consistent with
lower Po availability to microorganisms and consequently
with conditions unsuitable for mineralization and thus with
higher Pi concentrations and especially with higher Po concentrations
(low Pi:Po ratio).
Thus, taking into account future scenarios of flooding intensity
rise and the projected scenarios of the amounts of P
received by coastal waters from rivers in China (Strokal et al.
2014), a suitable management to both preserve biodiversity
and to maintain this wetland area in optimum conditions to
act as a natural eutrophication buffer should tend to favor
mangrove communities in the new areas that reach more than
220 days y-1 of flooding, and the combination of the three tallgrasses
below this level of flooding.