xabstract
Tidal estuarine wetlands of China are rich
in plant diversity, but several global change drivers,
such as species invasion, are currently affecting the
biogeochemical cycles of these ecosystems. We
seasonally analyzed the carbon (C), nitrogen (N),
and phosphorus (P) concentrations in litters and soils
and in leaves, stems, and roots of the C3 invasive
species Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud.
and of the C4 native species Cyperus malaccensis var.
brevifolius Boeckeler to investigate the effect of C3
plant invasion on C, N, and P stoichiometry in the C4
plant-dominated tidal wetlands of the Minjiang River.
When averaged across seasons, the invasive species P.
australis had higher N concentrations and lower P
concentrations in leaves than the native species C.
malaccensis. N and P concentrations were lower in
litter (stem and leaf), whereas C concentrations in leaf
litter were higher in P. australis than in C. malaccensis.
The C, N, and P concentrations of the soil also did
not differ, but plants had a lower C:N and much higher
N:P ratios than soils. Root C:P and N:P ratios were
lower in the growing season both in the invasive and
the native species. The leaf C:N, C:P and N:P ratios
peaked in summer. The invasive species had lower
C:N ratio in leaves and roots, and higher N:P ratios in
all biomass organs and litter than the native species, an
effect related with the higher N-resorption capacity of
the invasive species. Interspecific differences in C:N,
C:P, and N:P ratios may likely reflect the differences
in plant morphology, nutrient-use efficiency, and
photosynthetic capacity between the C3 (P. australis)
and C4 (C. malaccensis) plants. Our results generally
suggested that the success of P. australis in these
wetlands was related to its slow growth and higher
resorption capacity of N and P. This implies a more
conservative use of limited nutrients, particularly N,
by P. australis, and to higher N concentration in its
biomass thus potentially contributing to its invasiveness
in these estuarine wetlands



xintroduction



Tidal estuarine wetlands cover an estimated
12,000 km2 of Chinaís 18,000-km coastline (Shen
and Zhu 1999; Huang et al. 2006). These tidal
wetlands are generally rich in animal and plant
biodiversity (Zhou et al. 2006) and are reported to
have important biogeochemical roles within the entire
estuarine ecosystem (Zeng et al. 2009a, b; Wang et al.
2010a, b; Tong et al. 2010). The Minjiang River
estuary in southeastern China is an important tidal
wetland ecosystem due to its unique location at the
transition between central and southern subtropical
climatic zones (Zheng et al. 2006).
Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. and
Cyperus malaccensis var. brevifolius Boeckeler (syn.
Cyperus malaccensis subsp. monophyllus (Vahl) T.
Koyama) comprise much of the emergent macrophytic
biomass in the Minjiang River estuary (Liu et al.
2006). Some stands of C. malaccensis have been
invaded over the past 30 years by P. australis, which
is now the single most prevalent plant species in the
wetland. This change in dominance may be affecting
the biogeochemical cycles of the estuarine wetland,
because the soil properties and rates of litter decomposition
in the stands of P. australis and C. malaccensis
are known to differ (Zhang et al. 2008; Jia et al.
2008; Zeng et al. 2009a, b; Tong and Liu 2009). Here
we examine the nutrient stoichiometry of P. australis
and C. malaccensis as a potential source of the
differences between the litters and soils associated
with these species and with the success invasive
plants.
The elemental composition of plant tissues is
tightly associated with the nutrient concentration of
litter, which in turn can feed back into the soils
(McClaugherty et al. 1985; Bridgham et al. 1995;
Ehrenfeld et al. 2005; Townsend et al. 2007). Higher
ratios of carbon (C) to other nutrients in litter can
increase C storage and reduce the mobilities and rates
of mineralization of key nutrients (Wang et al. 2010b;
Wang and Yu 2008). Such effects appear to be caused
by the increasing nutrient limitation of soil microbial
communities when provided with nutrient-poor
organic material. Plant-litter-soil interactions have
been extensively modeled (Vitousek and Peter 1984;
Northup et al. 1998; Meier and Bowman 2008),
observed in numerous ecosystems (Cebrian 1999;
Cebrian and Lartigue 2004; Gu®sewell and Verhoeven
2006; Wurzburger and Hendrick 2009), and experimentally
examined (Jobba¥gy and Jackson 2001;
Hawlena and Schmitz 2010) in terrestrial ecosystems,
but little is known about the effect of the relative flux
of nutrients through estuarine plants into the litter on
the soils of tidal estuarine ecosystems.
Variable leaf ratios of C to nitrogen (N) (C:N) and
to phosphorus (P) (C:P) are assumed to be caused by
the physiological adjustment of plant species to the
local supplies of nutrients (Broadley et al. 2004;
Kerkhoff et al. 2006; Demars and Edwards 2007;
Townsend et al. 2007; Elser et al. 2010; Penòuelas et al.
2010; Sardans and Penòuelas 2014). Evidence, however,
is accumulating that intraspecific differences in
terrestrial plants can match or exceed interspecific
variability (Wright et al. 2004; Elser et al. 2010;
Penòuelas et al. 2010; Sardans and Penòuelas 2013).
These species-specific patterns of elemental composition
likely reflect important differences in plant
functional traits that have unique biochemical, and
hence elemental, requirements. The elemental composition
of C. malaccensis may thus differ from that of
P. australis, even for individuals growing under very
similar environmental conditions, and thereby may
affect the dynamics of soil nutrients by affecting the
elemental composition of litter and/or the capacity to
take up nutrients. Shifts in nutrient stoichiometry have
frequently been associated with the success of invasive
plants (Sardans and Penòuelas 2012). Successful
invasive species in nutrient-rich environments usually
have low C:nutrient ratios (Penòuelas et al. 2010) and
high N:P ratios (Neves et al. 2010) in their tissues, but
the effect of N:P ratios on the success of invasive
plants is still unclear. Moreover, positive relationship
between N:P ratio and invasive success has not often
been reported for nutrient-poor environments.
In drier environments, plants with C4 metabolism
traits, such as C. malaccensis, frequently have an
advantage over C3 metabolism plants, such as P.
australis (Wilson 2007; Zand et al. 2006; Kocacinar
and Sage 2003). However, less is known with respect
to the competitive advantage between these two
strategies in wetland areas with other limiting resources
than water. In wetland environments where water is not the limiting factor, nutrient-use strategy
can be crucial in the competitive relationships among
plant species and also in invasive success. To test this
hypothesis, we have examined the link between the
invasion of a C3 monocot with the seasonal variation
of the C, N, and P stoichiometry of a C4 monocot that
dominates the subtropical tidal wetlands of the Minjiang
River in China. Our aims were (1) to study the
C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios of the leaves, stems, and roots
and their relationships in the invasive C3 plant, P.
australis, and of the native C4 plant, C. malaccensis,
over the year and specially during the growing season,
and (2) to examine the relationships between the
success of plant invasion and the nutrient concentrations
and stoichiometries of the plants, litters, and
soils.

xmethods

Study area
This study was conducted in the Shanyutan wetland
(260104600N; 1193703100E, Fig. 1), the largest tidal
estuarine wetland (approximately 3120 ha) in the
estuary of the Minjiang River. The climate in this
region is relatively warm and wet, with a mean annual
temperature of 19.6 C and a mean annual
precipitation of 1346 mm (Zheng et al. 2006). The
soil surface is submerged across the study site beneath
10ñ120 cm of water for 3ñ3.5 h during each tidal
inundation. Soil surfaces of the entire wetland are
exposed at low tide, and the average annual weight
percentages of water in soil and soil redox potential are
116.39 % and 12.57 mV, respectively, and soil remains
flooded at some depths. The average salinity of
the tidal water between May and December 2007 was
4.2 ± 2.5 %.
Phragmites australis and C. malaccensis are the
two dominant species of plants in this estuarine
wetland. They are typically found in the upper (mid
to high) portions of mudflats. P. australis is an
invasive plant that has invaded this area over the past
30 years, to now become the single most prevalent
plant species in the wetland. It mainly invaded the
native C. malaccensis wetland, typically found in the
upper (mid to high) portions of mudflats. P. australis
grows between April and October, the highest population
height is about 2 m, and the density is about
250 m-2. C. malaccensis is a native plant, typically
found in the upper (mid to high) portions of mudflats
that grows between April and October, the highest
population height is about 1.5 m, and the density is
about 1000 m-2. Belowground rhizomes are mainly
distributed in the top soil layers. The primary mode of
reproduction is vegetative growth via belowground
 rhizomes which spread via creeping growth in the
topsoil layers. The decomposition rates of the litter of
P. australis are slower than those of C. malaccensis
(Tong et al. 2010). Both species are located in sites
with similar flooding intensity, but despite this,
wetland soils in areas dominated by P. australis
generally have a lower pH and bulk density and a
higher salinity than do areas dominated by C. malaccensis
(Jia et al. 2008).
Sample collection and measurements
Plant, litter, and soil samples were collected in May,
July, September, and December 2007 to capture
potential seasonal differences in chemical composition.
Most plant growth occurs between April and
October, and litter is produced largely toward the end
of the growing season into early winter. Plant samples
always were collected at the same height above the
ground. We selected stands of the two plant communities
for the collection of aboveground biomass,
randomly established one large quadrat (10 9 10 m)
in each stand and sampled the aboveground biomass
from three randomly selected sub-quadrats
(1 9 1 m). The harvested aboveground biomass was
sorted into living and dead (litter) material. The plant
organs and litter fraction were then sorted into stems
and leaf tissues. Litter was sampled each week during
the studied seasons, and only fresh litter was used to
conduct the analyses. Root biomass was also harvested
from these sample sub-quadrats. All plant material
was gently washed with water and then oven dried to a
constant mass (80 C for 24ñ36 h) and weighed. Soil
samples from the top layer (0ñ30 cm) were concurrently
collected from the three replicate sub-quadrats
and air dried, and any other roots or visible plant
remains were removed. These dried and cleaned soil
samples were then finely ground in a ball mill. The
total numbers of analyzed samples of plants, litters,
and soils were 30, 24, and 12, respectively, for the P.
australis wetland and 33, 15, and 12, respectively, for
the C. malaccensis wetland. We also determined
biomasses by ha to calculate mineralomasses in
above- and belowground biomass, especially in
summer after at the end growing season, and those
mineralomasses produced by litter during entire year.
Concentrations of C and N in plants and litters were
determined using a Vario EL III Elemental Analyzer
(Elementar Scientific Instruments, Germany). Total
soil organic C was determined by the K2Cr2O7ñH2SO4
digestion method (Sorrell et al. 1997; Bai et al. 2005).
Total soil N was analyzed with the Kjeldahl method
(K-370, Buchi Scientific Instruments, Switzerland). P
concentrations of plants, litters, and soils were measured
using molybdate-blue reaction (Lu 1999) with a
UV-2450 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Scientific
Instruments, Japan).
Data analysis
We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) to compare
C, N, and P concentrations and C:N, C:P, and N:P
ratios of the plants, litters, and soils of the two plant
communities using species and seasonality as independent
categorical factors. We also used ANOVA
to analyze the community species differences of
mineralomasses (C, N and P) in above- and belowground
biomasses in summer, after the growing
season. We calculated average C, N, and P concentrations
and mineralomasses, and mass ratios (C:N,
C:P, and N:P ratios) of different plant organs
(leaves, stems, and roots), litters, and soils and
performed all these statistical analyses using SPSS
13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA). Pearson correlation
analyses identified the relationships among the C:N,
C:P, and N:P ratios of the plants, litters, and soils of
the estuarine system. We used major axis (MA) and
standardized major axis (SMA) (SMATR package;
http://www.bio.mq.edu.au/ ecology/SMATR) regression
to compare the slopes of the regressions of
the relationships among the C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios
of the plants, litters, and soils. Due to the large
number of repeated statistical analyses performed to
test the same model hypotheses on ëëníí dependent
variables, we have applied Bonferroni correction to
test each individual hypothesis at a significance level
of a/n (0.05/n).
The rate of nutrient resorption (NRE) was estimated
as the percentage of nutrient withdrawn from green
leaves before leaf abscission:
NRE º 100%  ΩNbiomass  Nlitterﬁ=Nbiomass
where Nbiomass and Nlitter are the concentrations of
nutrient in the biomass and litter in winter because it is
in this season that there is the largest litter production
(Huang et al. 2008).


xresults



Seasonal variation of C, N, and P concentrations and
ratios in plant organs, litters, and soils C, N, and P
concentrations varied seasonally in P. australis and
C. malaccensis and in the litters and soils of the
stands dominated by these species (Tables 1, 2). In
general, in aboveground plant organs (leaf and
stems), N and P concentrations were higher in
spring and C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios in summer,
whereas C concentrations were higher in summer
(leaves) and in autumn (stems) (Table 1). In the
most cases, stem litter, leaf litter, roots, and soils,
the C, N, and P concentrations and C:N, C:P, and
N:P ratios frequently changed among seasons but
without any clear patterns (Table 1). P. australis
had higher N concentrations in leaves than C.
malaccensis (Tables 1, 2). P. australis had lower P
concentrations and higher C:P ratio in stems and
stems litter and greater N:P ratio in leaves and stem
litter than C. malaccensis (Tables 1, 2).
There was a significant interaction effect of species
x season on the N concentration in leaf and soil, C:N
ratios in stem litter and soil, C:P in stem and N:P ratios
in stem and roots, and P concentration in stems
(P\0.05, Table 1, Fig. S1ñS6).
Relationships among C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios
The correlations of C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios among
plant organs (leaf, stems, and roots), litters, and soils
are shown in Figs. 2, 3, and 4. Litter C:N ratios were
positively correlated with plant organs C:N ratios for
C. malaccensis (P\0.01), and litter C:P ratios were
positively correlated with plant organs C:P ratios for
both P. australis and C. malaccensis (P\0.01). Litter
N:P ratios were positively correlated with those of
plant organs for P. australis (P\0.05); however,
these relationships were not observed in C. malaccensis.
Plant organs N:P ratios were negatively
correlated with those of the soil for both P. australis
and C. malaccensis (P\0.05). Soil C:N, C:P, and
N:P ratios were not significantly correlated with those
of litter for either species (P[0.05). Furthermore,
none of the slopes of the regression lines of the C:N,
C:P, and N:P ratios differed significantly between P.
australis and C. malaccensis (P[0.05, SMA test of
common slopes, Figs. 2, 3, 4).
N and P resorption
The average seasonal rates of N resorption for P.
australis and C. malaccensis were 35.4 ± 9.0 and
9.0 ± 6.6 %, respectively, and the rates of P resorption
for P. australis and C. malaccensis were
41.2 ± 10.9 and 26.5 ± 8.1 %, respectively. The
rates of both N and P resorption for P. australis were
significantly higher than those for C. malaccensis,
particularly for N (P\0.05, Fig. 5).
Mineralomasses production
At the end of the growing season, total C content in
aboveground biomass was higher in P. australis than
in C. malaccensis, and the C content in belowground
biomass was higher in C. malaccensis than in P.
australis. The total C content in total biomass was not
different between the two species (Fig. 6). The total N
content in aboveground and total biomass was higher
in P. australis than in C. malaccensis, whereas total P
contents were not statistically different between the
two species biomasses (Fig. 6).
xdiscussion 
Seasonal variation in C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios
C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios of the plant matter from P.
australis and C. malaccensis changed considerably over
the seasons. Leaf C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios peaked in
summer coinciding with the main growth phase for P.
australis and C. malaccensis. The invasive species
generally had lower C:N ratios and higher C:P and N:P
ratios than did the native species, an effect associated
with the higher capacity of the invasive species to resorb
N and P. This also reflects the generally higher concentrations
of N and lower of P in different tissues of the
invasive P. australis than in the native C. malaccensis.
Interspecific differences in C:N, C:P and N:P ratios may
likely reflect differences in plant morphology, nutrientuse
efficiency and photosynthetic capacity between the
C3 (P. australis) and C4 (C. malaccensis) monocots.
C:N, C:P and N:P ratios also changed seasonally in
the soils. Both C:N and C:P ratios peaked in the
autumn, but N:P ratios were lowest in autumn for both
the P. australis and C. malaccensis wetlands. Soil properties such as pH, salinity, and water content can
influence the seasonal variation in C, N, P concentrations
and therefore in C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios, as
reported by Wang et al. (2010a, b). Seasonal variation
in the total soil C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios in both
wetlands may also have been affected by the absorption
of nutrients by the plants and the release of
nutrients from the litter.
Relationships of changes in C:N, C:P and N:P
ratios with ecosystem functioning
C:N ratios of litter are generally strongly correlated
with the rates of litter decomposition in wetlands, with
lower C:N ratios usually associated with higher rates
of decomposition (Windham 2001). Litter accumulates
in the winter, which is consistent with the low rates of litter decomposition in the Minjiang River
estuary (Tong and Liu 2009) and with the negative
correlation between rate of decomposition of soil C
and litter C:N ratio in this estuary (Wang et al. 2010b).
Our results also support the C:N ratio as an indicator of
litter and organic-matter decomposition (Elser et al.
2003; Mulder et al. 2013) and further suggest that rates
of litter decomposition can be lower in invaded than in
native stands since litter C:N ratios of P. australis
were higher than those of C. malaccensis.
C:P and N:P ratios were lower in the native plants
than in the invasive plants during the growing season,
consistently with a higher growth rate for C. malaccensis
than for the invasive P. australis. The average
rates of growth of C. malaccensis and P. australis
were 2.1 and 1.4 % weekly, respectively (Zhang et al.
2008; Zeng et al. 2009a,b). Furthermore, net primary
productivity of the roots was higher for C. malaccensis
(724.25 gC m-2 year-1) than for P. australis
(443.04 gC m-2 year-1, Zhang et al. 2008, 2009a,
b), which is thus associated with the lower C:P and N:P
ratios in C. malaccensis. Lower C:P and N:P ratios are
usually associated with higher growth rates (Elser
et al. 2003; Penòuelas et al. 2013).
The invasive plant species in our study is a
slower growing species than the native species
(Zhang et al. 2008, 2009a, b), suggesting that
invasive success in the Minjiang River estuarine
tidal wetland depends on a lower growth rate and a
more conservative use of nutrients. Most studies in
environments with no limitation of any resource
such as water, light, or nutrients generally find that
plant invasion is frequently dependent on higher
rates of nutrient uptake and cycling (Funk and
Vitousek 2007; Gonza¥lez et al. 2010; Matzek 2011;
Sardans and Penòuelas 2012), whereas invasive
success in environments with a serious limitation
of resources is instead frequently dependent on a
more conservative use of the limiting resource,
despite the low number of studies and the frequently
contradictory results (Gonza¥lez et al. 2010; Neves
et al. 2010; Sardans and Penòuelas 2012). In this
study, P. australis had a high capacity to allocate N
to photosynthesis. Interestingly, this ability enhances
invasive success in both nutrient-rich and nutrientpoor
sites (Feng 2008; Matzek 2011).
Subtropical zones have high precipitation and
temperatures that favor the erosion and loss of N and
P, so nutrients are limited (Olde Venterink et al. 2003;
Tian et al. 2010). Nutrient limitation is especially
significant in tidal wetlands, likely because of the
periodic inundation of the soil that limits the access of
the plants to the soil nutrients by the anoxic effects on
root growth (Amlin and Rood 2001; Kirwan and
Guntenspergen 2012), by slowing mineralization
(Adame et al. 2010) and by high levels of leaching
of P and particularly of N (Noe and Hupp 2007;
Kobayashi et al. 2009). The higher N:P and lower C:N
ratios together with the higher capacity of P. australis
to resorb N and P indicate a more conservative use of
nutrients in this invasive species than in the native
species. The average N:P ratios (on a mass basis) were
14.0 ± 2.6 and 8.1 ± 1.0 for P. australis and C.
malaccensis, respectively, which are from similar to
lower than the average N:P ratios (14ñ16) of terrestrial
plants and aquatic macrophytes and algae in their
natural environments (Elser et al. 2000; Gu®sewell and
Koerselman 2002; Geider and La Roche 2002; Knecht
and Go®ransson 2004; Sardans et al. 2012). Leaf N:P
ratio is often used to represent nutrient limitation
during plant growth (Tessier and Raynal 2003; Wang
and Yu 2008). Thus, the foliar N:P ratios of this study
suggest that N can be limiting. The wetland soils of our
study had particularly low N:P ratios, 2.5ñ2.7 on a
mass basis, compared to the soils from other ecosystems,
on average 5.9 on a mass basis, at global scale
(Cleveland and Liptzin 2007; Tian et al. 2010),
indicating that N probably should be more limiting
in the soil of this wetland area. The higher N:P ratios in
plants than in soils and the negative relationships
between plant N:P ratio and soil N:P ratio (Fig. 3)
suggested again N limitation since plants made a
greater effort to conserve N than P, especially when
soil N:P ratios were lower, whereas the opposite
occurred with P. Both plant species had much higher
N:P ratio than soil, and the negative relationship
between plant N:P ratio and soil N:P ratio further
suggests that when N is more limiting, plants tend to
accumulate even more N. Moreover, the slopes between plant C:N ratio and soil C:N ratio are below 1
whereas the corresponding slopes of C:P ratio are
above 1 suggesting again that plants retain more
strongly N than P. Despite this general trend toward a
high retention capacity of N in biomass observed in
these wetlands, this capacity to retain and efficiently
use N was greater in the invasive P. australis than in
the native C. malaccensis. P. australis had higher
resorption capacity for P, and specially for N, higher
foliar N concentration and C:N ratio in stem litter, and
lower C:N ratio in leaves and roots than C. malaccensis.
All this was also related with the observed
higher N content in total biomass in P. australis than in
C. malaccensis despite the total biomass was lower
(but not significantly) in the invasive species. Altogether,
these findings suggest greater N use efficiency
in the community dominated by the invasive plant.
To summarize, we found low N and P soil
availabilities and low soil N:P ratios in the Minjiang
River tidal estuarine wetlands. We observed lower
C:N ratios and much higher N:P ratios in the plants
than in the soils indicating that plants retain nutrients,
especially N. P. australis was more efficient than the
native C. malaccensis in the use of N to fix C. This
likely contributes to P. australisí invasive success in
these estuarine wetlands. As frequently observed in
previous studies a more conservative use of resources,
when limiting, is related with the invasive capacity
(Funk and Vitousek 2007; Matzek 2011; Sardans and
Penòuelas 2012). These results were consistent with
previous studies indicating that the success of invasive
plants in nutrient-poor soils depended on conservative
strategies, such as a higher nutrient-use efficiency
(Funk and Vitousek 2007; Gonza¥lez et al. 2010;
Matzek 2011), especially on short-time scales (Funk
and Vitousek 2007) and long nutrient residence times
(Laungani and Knops 2009). The results of our study
thus suggest that a conservative use of nutrients (in
particular N, that the results suggested as limiting)
could contribute to the invasive success of P. australis
in the Minjiang River tidal estuarine wetlands in China
and determines the N-cycle in this wetland area.
As a group, C4 plants are generally considered
more conservative in their use of limited resources and
consequently more stress tolerant than C3 plants.
Plants with C4 metabolism, such as C. malaccensis,
have frequently been shown to have a competitive
advantage over plants with C3 metabolism plants,
such as P. australis, in drier environments (Zand et al.
2006; Kocacinar and Sage 2003). In general, reductions
in water availability have greater negative effects
on C3 than C4 plants (Wilson 2007; Luo et al. 2013),
and during dry periods in wetlands C4 plants tend to
displace C3 plants (Malone et al. 2013). However, less
is known with respect to the competitive advantage
between these two strategies in wetland areas where
resources other than water are limiting plant growth
and survival. Our results show that the invasive C3
species has more conservative traits such as slow
growth rates, higher foliar N:P ratios and higher N
nutrient resorption efficiency. We assessed the two
dominant plant species in these estuarine wetlands and
found that our data are contrary to the typical
expectations of competitive outcomes between C3
and C4 plants in resource limiting conditions. For the
plant traits examined in our study, the invasive C3 plant showed values consistent with conservative
resource use strategy compared to the native C4 plant.
P. australis has invaded these wetlands during the past
30 years and is now the single most prevalent plant
species, thus suggesting that other traits, such as the
use of nutrients and the growth strategy can be
underlying its invasive success.
Conclusions
The nutrient composition and stoichiometry in plants,
litters, and soils showing low concentration of soil N
and very low soil N:P ratio strongly suggested that N
would be a limiting factor in these tidal estuarine
wetlands. Plant strategies under these environmental
conditions are based on slow plant growth and a high
capacity to retain nutrients in the biomass associated
with a high capacity to resorb nutrients. Our results
also suggested that the success of plant invasion was
related to a more conservative use of nutrients, in this
case P and mainly N, in the invasive relative to the
native species.