xabstract
Invasive aquatic plants in U.S. lakes and reservoirs
frequently require managers to implement plant control,
yet little is known about how these management efforts alter
habitat available to adult fish. We used a beforeñafter,
control-impact (BACI) design to study four Minnesota lakes
(two treated lakes and two untreated control lakes) to
evaluate the influence of plant management using herbicides
(i.e., endothall/2,4-D) on diets of adult bluegill (Lepomis
macrochirus Raf`inesque) over the course of 4 yr. We
hypothesized that removing plants would result in an
immediate increase of prey items available to bluegill
reflected in an increase in total items in the bluegill diet,
and that an increase in prey items would affect diet breadth.
Invasive Eurasian watermilfoil, Myriophyllum spicatum L., was
eliminated following herbicide treatment; however, native
plants immediately expanded and plant overall abundance
in the littoral zone was not reduced. We found no
significant treatment effects on number of prey items per
stomach, stomach content mass, diet composition, or
abundance of major diet groups. However, we found that
diet breadth increased posttreatment in the fall season, as
evidenced by a more even distribution of bluegill diet items
in stomach contents. Bluegill diet composition varied across
years and lakes (primarily due to changes in Cladocera), but
not due to treatment. We concluded that early seasonal
application of herbicides resulted in an immediate shift
from invasive aquatic plants to a diverse native community,
which had minor effects on diets of bluegill.



xintroduction


Aquatic plants provide many functions, including primary
production, stabilizing sediments and maintaining
water clarity, and habitat for zooplankton, macroinvertebrates,
and numerous fish species (Dibble et al. 1996,
Carpenter et al. 1998, Diehl and Kornijow 1998). Many
juvenile and adult fish have been reported in habitats
containing aquatic plants, often in greater densities than
areas without plants (Killgore et al. 1989). Moreover,
younger and smaller fish become more abundant as plant
density increases (Barnett and Schneider 1974, Borawa et al.
1979, Moxley and Langford 1982). Macroinvertebrate
abundances and diversity tend to increase with plant
biomass and leaf complexity, because leaves and stems
provide substrate for attachment and protection from
predators (Gilinsky 1984, Keast 1984, Beckett et al. 1992).
However, these relationships do not necessarily apply to
habitats colonized by invasive plant species.
Motivated by the widespread biological invasions occurring
in aquatic systems, researchers have long studied effects
of invasive aquatic plants and their management on systems.
Although complete plant removal can lead to increased
turbidity and decreased fish populations (e.g., Mangas-
Ram¥irez and El¥ias-Guti ¥errez 2004, Parsons et al. 2009) as
well as regime shifts in lakes (Scheffer and Carpenter 2003),
researchers have shown that invasive plant removal followed
by immediate reestablishment of native plants has neutral
to positive short-term effects on fish and macroinvertebrate
populations (Bremigan et al. 2005, Kovalenko et al. 2010).
Establishment of Eurasian watermilfoil, Myriophyllum
spicatum L., can displace native aquatic plants (Madsen et
al. 1991) and decrease macroinvertebrate biomass (Keast
1984, Cheruvelil et al. 2002). Eurasian watermilfoil is a
highly dissected plant and has a relatively high surface-area
to plant-mass ratio compared with submerged aquatic
plants native to the Midwestern United States (Dibble and
Thomaz 2009). Therefore, it could theoretically provide
more habitats for macroinvertebrates than native communities
on average (Krull 1970, Gilinsky 1984, Pardue and
Webb 1985). However, despite its complexity, Eurasian
watermilfoil generally supports fewer macroinvertebrates
per gram of plant than native plant species, and macroinvertebrate
density decreases with increasing cover of
Eurasian watermilfoil (Dvorak and Best 1982, Keast 1984,
Cheruvelil et al. 2002). Eurasian watermilfoil exudes
allelopathic chemicals, and researchers have shown that
epiphyton growth is negatively affected by the presence of
Eurasian watermilfoil (Gross et al. 1996, Nam et al. 2008).
Because epiphyton is a major food resource for primary
consumers, allelopathic effects of Eurasian watermilfoil
likely have an indirect negative effect on macroinvertebrate
abundance and, as an extension, fish foraging.
Researchers have also found that the structure of
Eurasian watermilfoil monocultures influences fish foraging
(Valley and Bremigan 2002). When Eurasian watermilfoil
forms extensive homogeneous beds throughout the littoral
zone, aquatic plants act as barriers to fish movement (Keast
1984), and these barriers can reduce foraging success (Heck
and Thoman 1981, Savino and Stein 1982, Dionne and Folt
1991). The reduction of foraging success is due to an increase in search, encounter, and capture times (Anderson
1984, Diehl 1988). Crowder and Cooper (1982) found that
fish in high aquatic plant densities (177 6 10 stems m2) had
reduced prey capture rates and slower growth rates
compared with lower plant densities, despite the greater
biomass of prey available. In another study, prey capture
rates declined as a result of structural complexity, decreasing
foraging efficiency as habitat became more spatially
complex (Harrel and Dibble 2001).
Change in habitat complexity also affects fish diet,
including the diversity and evenness of prey items consumed
(i.e., diet breadth). The directionality of the
relationship between habitat complexity and diet breadth
is not clear cut, and depends on fish size, prey use of aquatic
plants, and prey assemblage. Researchers have found
evidence to support both that diet breadth widens (e.g.,
killifish, Vince et al. 1976) and narrows (e.g., pinfish, Stoner
1982) with increasing habitat complexity. Two distinct
mechanisms could explain these results. An increase in
habitat complexity can lead to a wider diet breadth when
prey becomes less available and a fish has no choice but to
eat the prey it finds. On the flip side, an increase in habitat
complexity could lead to only certain prey species being
available to fish or available in large numbers, therefore
narrowing a fishís diet breadth (Spotte 2007).
Removal of aquatic plants can temporarily release prey in
the environment, thus impacting fish populations (e.g.,
Bettoli et al. 1993, Trebitz et al. 1997, Bickel and Closs 2009).
For example, Bickel and Closs (2009) found that macroinvertebrate
biomass doubled with the mechanical removal of
the invasive oxygen weed [Lagarosiphon major (Ridl.) Moss]
and fish abundance increased by 150% in the treated areas.
Zooplankton density, particularly Cladocera, has been
shown to increase following plant removal; however, longterm
population trends depended on trophic dynamics such
as predation (Richard et al. 1985, Irvine et al. 1989). In
studies of mechanized removal of Eurasian watermilfoil,
bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus Raf`inesque) growth was maximized
when , 50% of plants remained (Trebitz and
Nibbelink 1996, Trebitz et al. 1997, Olson et al. 1998).
Researchers have suggested that this level of Eurasian
watermilfoil removal increases edge habitat, which could
increase the availability of macroinvertebrates, refuge from
predators, or a combination of both (Trebitz and Nibbelink
1996). Pothoven et al. (1999) found that bluegill growth
increased immediately following herbicide removal of up to
66% of plant cover and suggested that growth increased as a
result of either reduced competition for food or increased
utilization of different food sources. However, to our
knowledge, researchers have not tried to tease apart these
effects by investigating the impacts of Eurasian watermilfoil
removal on adult bluegill diets or looked at effects of plant
removal on a long-term scale.
We investigated the hypothesis that, as a result of
Eurasian watermilfoil removal, there would be a temporary
release of prey items into the environment, reflected by an
increase in bluegill diet items and a change in diet breadth.
We proposed two alternative hypotheses relative to a
change in diet breadth as a result of herbicide removal of
Eurasian watermilfoil: (1) a reduction in plant structure
increases prey availability in general, leading to an increase
in prey selection and a narrower diet breadth; and (2) a
decrease in plant structure increases diet breadth as a
greater diversity of prey becomes available. To test these
hypotheses, we measured bluegill diet composition before
and after herbicide removal of Eurasian watermilfoil and
evaluated changes in bluegill diets immediately and up to 4
yr following Eurasian watermilfoil removal. Additionally, we
evaluated the success of aquatic plant removal and the
establishment of native plants.


xmethods


Our experiment constituted of four eutrophic lakes
located in the Minneapolis, MN metropolitan area: Auburn,
Pierson, and Zumbra (Carver County), and Bush (Hennepin
County) (Table 1). These lakes ranged in area from 75 to 120
ha and had maximum depths from 8.5 to 25.6 m (Table 1).
Lakes were all dominated by Eurasian watermilfoil with a
surface coverage of at least 80% of the littoral zone (water
depth  4.5 m), and had a fish assemblage dominated by
bluegill (Skogerboe and Getsinger 2006). In terms of plant
composition (besides Eurasian watermilfoil), the lakes also
contained submergent plants including Ceratophyllum demersum
(coontail), Potamogetonaceae spp. (pondweeds), Elodea
canadensis L. (Canadian waterweed); as well as floating leaf
species including Nymphaea odorata Aiton (white water lily) in
2003 (Skogerboe and Getsinger 2006). In spring of 2004, a
low dose of endothall (1 mg/L) combined with 2,4-D (0.5 mg/
L) was used to control the Eurasian watermilfoil and a small
percentage of curly leaf pondweed (Potamogeton crispus L.) in
Bush and Zumbra lakes annually from 2004 to 2007. Auburn
and Pierson lakes were not treated with herbicide and
represent the untreated controls.
Aquatic plant abundance prior to herbicide treatment
was sampled in the last 2 wk of June and September of 2003
and posttreatment data were collected in the last 2 wk of
June and September of 2004 to 2007 (Skogerboe and Getsinger 2006). These sampling times were chosen to
represent the variation in bluegill prey from early summer
to early fall (Crowder and Cooper 1982). Plant samples were
collected with the use of a 36-cm-wide rake on a 3-m pole at
30 to 35 randomly selected locations within a 50 by 50 m
grid situated in the littoral zone of each lake. Each sample
was separated by species and oven dried to a constant mass
(Skogerboe and Getsinger 2006).
Bluegill were sampled in each lake, twice a year during the
first 2 wk of June and September for 5 yr (2003 to 2007) with
the use of a boat-mounted pulsed DC (250ñ350 V and 6ñ10 A)
electrofishing unit. In each lake, four areas of the shoreline
were sampled at night for a total of approximately 2 h of
electrofishing time per lake in 15 to 20ñmin intervals. By using
this collection method, we assumed that we would collect
primarily adult bluegill (i.e., individuals . 75 mm) that had
transitioned from feeding primarily in plants to open water.
We randomly selected aminimum of 20 bluegill fromthe field
collection, measured total length (TL) and body mass, and
preserved the samples in 10% formalin. Specimens were
transported to the laboratory at Mississippi State University
where stomachs were removed and dissected, and contents
preserved in 70% ethanol and stored until analysis (Bowen
1983). Macroinvertebrates, zooplankton, and all other stomach
contents were enumerated during analysis and identified
to order with the use of Merritt and Cummins (2008) and
Thorp and Covich (2001).We also measured stomach-content
mass as an additional estimate of foraging success because of
the variation in size among taxonomic groups.
Diet breadth was calculated with the use of Levinís
normalized B, which is a measure of specificity of resource
use and has a standardized form, BA (Levins 1968). Diet
breadth is narrowest when only one resource was represented
and broadest when equal proportions of each prey item was
represented in the bluegill diet. BA values are B values
standardized to be between 0 and 1, 0 being only one resource
represented and 1 being equal distribution of prey items.
Statistical analysis
We used a beforeñafter, control-impact (BACI) sampling
design and analysis to determine the effect of herbicide
treatment on fish diets (composition and total items). We
used a ëëbeyond-BACIíí approach because there were multiple
sampling times representing both treatment periods and
types. In other words, the mixed-effects ANOVA model we
used included three fixed effects: treatment (control and
impact) and time (before and after) and their interaction.
Sampling time and site were designated as random effects
(for details on the beyond BACI model specification see
Underwood 1994). We calculated the individual BACI
contrasts with the use of the LS Means Contrast function
on the interaction factors (treatment 3 time) and recorded
the estimate, standard error, F ratio, and P value with the
program JMP 9 (SAS Institute 2010). This process was
repeated for total invertebrates in the fish stomachs, fish
stomach content mass, and for each of the diet components
that made up at least 5% of the fish diets. Additionally, we
analyzed the total plant abundance data from Skogerboe and
Getsinger (2006) with the use of the beyond-BACI approach.
Data that were not normally distributed were log-transformed.
We chose a º 0.05 as the cutoff for statistical
significance and adjusted a for multiple tests with the use of
the Bonferroni correction (e.g., five tests, a º 0.01). To assess
treatment effects on diet composition as a whole, we used
multiresponse permutation procedures (MRPP), which calculate
multivariate differences among predefined groups (in
this case bluegill diets in each lake before and after
treatment). We used the S¯renson coefficient as the distance
measure in the MRPP. We tested significance of the null
hypothesis that groups were not different with a Monte Carlo
randomization procedure with 10,000 permutations, P values
less than 0.05 represented no difference between pre- and
posttreatment groups. We ran MRPP analyses with PC-ORD
(version 5, MjM Software Design, Gleneden Beach, OR).
To describe differences in the composition of bluegill
diets among treatments and years, we ran a nonmetric
dimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis. This ordination technique
conserves rank-order distances of the dissimilarity
matrix and does not make assumptions about multivariate
normality. Diet comparisons with the use of nonmetric
dimensional scaling (NMDS) were based on the relative
abundance of diet items in bluegill stomachs (n º 40)
representing each year of sampling in each lake for a total
of 20 fish sample groups. We included prey and other items
present in . 5% of the bluegill stomachs in the NMDS
analysis. We first standardized the data by lake totals in order
to reduce the influence of outliers. The NMDS was conducted
with the use of the autopilot method in PC-ORD (McCune
and Mefford 1999). This method uses the Bray-Curtis
distance measure, runs 250 iterations on real data, and then
recommends a solution based on stress values, or ëëbadness of
fit,íí associated with each dimensionality and whether the
stability criterion of 0.00001 is met. The analysis is then rerun
with the best configuration found in the trial runs described
above with 40 iterations on the real data.


xresults


Shift in vegetated habitat
Application of endothall/2,4-D was effective in the
removal of Eurasian watermilfoil and curly-leaf pondweed.
After the herbicide application in spring 2004, the biomass
of invasive plant species decreased to a mean of 2% (6 1%
SE) of pretreatment levels, whereas native plant biomass
increased by a mean of 7.5% (6 16% SE) in the second and
third years following treatment (Figure 1). Once invasive
plants were removed from the lakes, native species such as
Chara spp., Elodea canadensis Rich., Najas flexilis (Willd.) Rostk.
& Schmidt, Polygonom amphibium L., Potamogeton illinoensis
Morong., Stuckenia pectinata (L.) Bo® rner, Vallisneria americana
Michx., and Heteranthera dubia (Jacq.) MacMill. returned 1 yr
after treatment (Skogerboe and Getsinger 2006). Untreated
control lakes had a mean of 32 and 26 (6 5% SE)
composition of invasive plants over the course of the
sampling period (for details on species richness see
Kovalenko et al. 2010). Total plant biomass (g DM per rake
sample) did not change as a result of herbicide treatment in
the treated lakes (Table 2). Bluegill characteristics
We collected total length (TL) and body mass measurements
from 522 bluegill collected via boat electrofishing
from 2003 to 2007. Bluegill TL ranged from 50 to 191 mm
with an average TL of 126 6 1 mm. Body mass ranged from
1.9 to 169.5 g with an average mass of 43.9 6 1.2 g. We
collected 99% adult bluegill; only 12 individuals had a TL ,
75 mm. Stomach contents were analyzed for a total of 842
bluegill; 28 or 3.3% of the stomachs were empty.
Short-term effects on diet
Across all four lakes we found 18 taxa in bluegill diets
(Table 3). Two taxa orders (Cladocera and Diptera)
comprised . 73% of diet items within treated and
untreated control lakes and 11 were present in at least
5% of the bluegill samples. We did not find any effect of
treatment on the number of prey in bluegill stomachs F(1, 8)
º 1.09, P º 0.33 (Table 2 Figure 2). Neither abundance of
the dominant prey types nor the stomach content masses
of bluegill in the treated lakes differed from before and
after treatment such that the pattern was different from
the change in untreated control lakes from the first to
second year (Table 2). According to the MRPP analysis,
there was also no difference between diet compositions
before and after treatment in the treated lakes for either
June or September the year after herbicide application, Pº
0.42 and 0.45 for Bush and Pº0.07 and 0.07 for Zumbra for
June and September, respectively.
Bluegill diet breadth, represented by the standardized
Levinís BA, broadened between September of 2003 and
2004 in the treated lakes (Table 4). During the same time
period, diet breadth narrowed in the untreated control
lakes. Diet breadth did not widen in the treated lakes
because of an increase in richness of prey items, but rather
a more even distribution of prey types represented in the
diet. In contrast, diet breadth narrowed between June of
2003 and 2004 in the treated lakes; however, this diet
breadth also narrowed in the untreated control lakes, and
therefore was not a significant change due to herbicide
treatment. Because diet breadth was calculated at the
population level, both the treated and untreated control
lakes were only represented by two data points before and
after treatment; therefore we were unable to assess the
statistical significance of these differences.
Long-term effects on diets
We found no long-term treatment effects on the
number of prey items; stomach content mass; plant
biomass; or abundance of Cladocera, Trichoptera, Ephemeroptera,
Diptera, and Hymenoptera from 2005 until 2007
(Table 2). The stress value for the NMDS ordination on relative
abundance of diet items in bluegill stomachs from 2003 to
2007 was 7.2 for the two-dimensional solution, which is
considered a good fit according to Clarke (1993). In other
words, the ordination explained 92.8% of the variance in
the dissimilarity matrix of the diet samples. The analysis
required 58 iterations, and the final stability was , 0.00001.
The proximity of the points (fish samples) and triangles (diet
items) on the NMDS ordination demonstrates how similar
the diets of bluegill in each lake and year were with one
another. A major difference in feeding variability of bluegill
was the importance of Cladocera (Figure 3). Bluegill diets in
each lake, independent of treatment type, were constituted
primarily of Cladocera in at least 1 yr. Bluegill samples that
were not associated with Cladocera had greater quantities
of plant material and plant-dwelling macroinvertebrates
(e.g., Odonata). 


xdiscussion
 Prey abundance
We did not find evidence to support our hypothesis that
abundance of prey items in bluegill stomachs would
increase as a result of Eurasian watermilfoil control and a
corresponding release of food items into the environment.
This hypothesis was derived from the negative relationship
typically found between fish foraging success and habitat
complexity and the positive effect of Eurasian watermilfoil
on habitat complexity. In our study, Eurasian watermilfoil
was successfully controlled and biomass was reduced in
treated lakes following herbicide treatment at the wholelake
scale to 2% of preherbicide levels (Skogerboe and
Getsinger 2006). However, the littoral zone was immediately
colonized by native plants, which is evident because of the
lack of difference in plant biomass by treatment type, and
habitat complexity likely was not reduced to the extent
necessary to release enough prey items to observe a
treatment effect. Because adult bluegill (. 75 mm TL)
primarily feed in open-water habitats and on zooplankton
(Werner et al. 1981), we would have expected an increase in
zooplankton (e.g., Cladocera) importance in treated lakes if
herbicide treatment had resulted in greater areas of open
water. Although zooplankton was an important food item
(Cladocera made up . 50% of diet items in both untreated
control and treated lakes), the relative importance of
zooplankton varied by season and year, irrespective of
treatment. These dietary shifts within fish populations could
be due to effects of bluegill consumption on zooplankton
dynamics or differences in zooplankton dynamics among
lakes (Vanni 1987, Mittelbach and Osenberg 1993). Our
results are consistent with a study by Savino et al. (1992),
who found that bluegill prey capture rates did not differ at
plant densities greater than 100 stems m2, even though
macroinvertebrate densities were greater at increasing
plant densities.
Further, our findings contrast with research on largemouth
bass response to the removal of Hydrilla verticillata,
another invasive aquatic plant. Researchers found that
number of prey in largemouth bass diets increased by
21% within 3 yr of invasive aquatic plant removal and the
establishment of native plants (Sammons and Maceina
2006). The difference in effects could be attributed to the
different foraging strategies of different-sized predators
and the types of prey consumed by largemouth bass and
bluegill. Furthermore, time required to establish native
plants was different for southern reservoirs than for
northern lakes in our study, which likely influenced the
effect of aquatic plant removal on fish growth over time.
Diet breadth
Although we found that the overall number of prey items
in bluegill diets was not affected by control of Eurasian
watermilfoil, the diet breadth of bluegill increased in the fall
sampling season following treatment. This result provides
some evidence to support the hypothesis that certain types
of prey become more available with a decrease in plant
complexity following Eurasian watermilfoil control, and as a
result, bluegill would consume a greater variety of prey and
thus widen their diet breadth. Interestingly, the increase in
diet breadth in the fall was not due to an increase in types of
preyótypes of prey actually decreased across both untreated
control and treated lakes the year after treatmentóbut a
more even distribution of prey in the bluegill diets. This
result suggests that other types of desirable prey may have
become more available to bluegill as plant structure
changed from complex Eurasian watermilfoil to the simple
stems of white water lily, for example. According to optimal
foraging theory, diet breadths widen when the abundance of
food items decreases, although this theory has been
criticized for not accurately predicting behavior in many
circumstances (see review by Pyke 1984). Our study was not
designed to distinguish between the abundance of food
items in the environment and diet selection. Therefore it is
possible that the widening of diet breadth in the fall season
was due to a decline in food abundance in the treated lakes;
however, certain studies on fish have shown that diet
breadth changes irrespective of food abundance (e.g.,
Hammerschlag et al. 2010). In our study, stomach content
mass tended to be less in treated lakes than untreated
control lakes in September 2004 (Figure 4); however, this
difference was not statistically significant. An examination
of macroinvertebrate abundance would have been necessary
to evaluate what was driving the treatment effect on diet
breadth.
Diets may have broadened as a result of treatment in the
fall because of a shift in plant characteristics. Aquatic plants
provide refuge and food sources for zooplankton and
macroinvertebrates; however, these affiliations depend on
the traits of aquatic plants. Eurasian watermilfoil has been
shown to exude allelochemicals, which could have limited
the diversity of species living in these plants and thus available for fish (Linden and Lehtiniemi 2005). Also, leaf
complexity and patterns of senescence likely changed as a
result of plant community shift to native plants, therefore
altering the amount of refuge available, allowing fish greater
access to a variety of species (for example: Amphipods,
Ostacods, Copepods, and Cladocera). However, the abundance
of prey in bluegill stomachs varied primarily by
season and year rather than as a result of herbicide
treatment. Similarly, in a study of six lakes, Cheruvelil et
al. (2002) found that most of the variance in macroinvertebrate
density and biomass was attributed site and seasonal
effects. Also, in a concurrent study of juvenile fishes,
Kovalenko et al. (2009) found that fish diets did not vary
because of an herbicide treatment effect or habitat
complexity, but rather by lake and season.
In terms of management, removing aquatic plants can
increase fish growth; however, this depends on the
establishment of native plants. Some instances of aquatic
plant removal have resulted in virtually complete removal
of vegetation, resulting in fish population declines as well as
decreased water quality (e.g., Parsons et al. 2009). In our
study, herbicide treatment was specific for Eurasian watermilfoil
and did not hinder native plant establishment.
However, because our study only included lakes with 11 and
27% invasive plant cover prior to treatment, our results
may not be applicable to lakes being treated for higher
levels of infestation. Species-specific herbicide treatment as
well as targeted efforts to establish native plants following
invasive species management could reduce negative impacts
on the fish community. Future research is needed on the
effects of herbicide treatment of lakes with greater coverage
of invasive plants and subsequent native plant establishment
on fish diets.
CONCLUSION
We rejected our hypothesis that Eurasian watermilfoil
control would result in a temporary release of food items in the environment, thus increasing total prey in bluegill diets.
However, we found evidence to support the hypothesis that
a decrease in habitat complexity changes the availability of
certain prey types, resulting in a more even distribution of
prey items and an increase in bluegill diet breadth. This
effect was only found in the fall season following herbicide
treatment, suggesting that this is a temporary effect
dependent on seasonal cycles of zooplankton and macroinvertebrates.
Because variation in bluegill diets was mostly
explained by seasonal and annual differences, plant removal
does not appear to have a biologically significant impact on
bluegill diets. Thus, when native plants replace invasive
aquatic plants immediately, as in this restoration, there are
relatively small changes to the system, including diet.