xabstract
Sargassum muticum (Phaeophyceae, Fucales)
has recently been introduced to Limfjorden (Denmark)
where its closest relative is the indigenous Halidrys
siliquosa. Previous studies have demonstrated large quantitative
(canopy biomass) and qualitative (canopy persistence)
differences in the habitat available to epibiota
within the canopies of these two macroalgae. We therefore
hypothesised that these algae would support different
epibiota communities and tested this by sampling the
epibiota of S. muticum and H. siliquosa on seven occasions
throughout 1997 by enclosing entire thalli in mesh
bags. We found 53 epibiota taxa and, with only one exception,
they were all recorded on both host species.
Species richness and abundance of epibiota exhibited
clear seasonal variation on both host species, although
epibiota biomass was seasonally constant on H. siliquosa
but not on S. muticum. These patterns were consistent
with the different life histories of the host species. There
was a weakly negative correlation between thallus size
and epibiota biomass for both host species. When taking
species-specific seasonal variation in thallus size into
consideration, S. muticum and H. siliquosa were found to
support significantly different epibiota biomasses. Multivariate
analyses showed that epibiota community structure
was different, although highly overlapping, between
the two species, whereas there was an almost parallel
temporal development in epibiota community structure.
We conclude that it is unlikely that the introduction of S.
muticum to Limfjorden has caused major changes in local
epibiota community structure. However, the standing
stock of epibiota is likely to have increased.

xintroduction
The introduction and subsequent expansion of Sargassum
muticum (Yendo) Fensholt as a permanent member of the
European algal flora has caused general concern about the
effects on indigenous biota (Critchley et al. 1987; Rueness
1989; Thelin 1989; Den Hartog 1997; Karlsson and Loo
1999). Several studies have indicated negative impacts by
S. muticum on indigenous algal assemblages (Fletcher
and Fletcher 1975; Ambrose and Nelson 1982; Viejo
1997; Cosson 1999; Staehr et al. 2000) but only a limited
number of studies have addressed the possible consequences
for macroalgal epibiota. Those that have, have
suggested few adverse effects, apparently due to a low
degree of habitat specificity among the epibiota (Withers
et al. 1975; Jephson and Gray 1977; Viejo 1999). Nevertheless,
following the introduction of S. muticum to Limfjorden,
a shallow Danish sound, biologists noted conspicuously
more epibiota associated with S. muticum relative
to other algae (M. Lauersen, County of Ringkøbing,
personal communication).
S. muticum was first recorded in Limfjorden in 1984
(Christensen 1984). Over a period of less than 15 years
the population grew from a few isolated individuals to
become the dominant component of the macroalgal flora
(Staehr et al. 2000). Such invasive behaviour is the
normal pattern where S. muticum has been introduced
(Knoepffler-Peguy et al. 1985; Nfflnez-Lpez and Casas
Valdez 1998; Cosson 1999; Fernandez 1999; Karlsson
and Loo 1999).
Halidrys siliquosa (L.) Lyngb. is a close relative of S.
muticum (Jensen 1974; Rousseau et al. 1997) and one
of only a few large (>15 cm) erect indigenous macroalgae
in Limfjorden. S. muticum and H. siliquosa both have
coarsely branched thalli that create a relatively large canopy
which may be a suitable habitat for a wide variety of
fauna and flora (Mukai 1971; Withers et al. 1975; Haage
1976; Norton and Benson 1983; Aguilar-Rosas and
Galindo 1990; Taylor and Cole 1994). During the course
of a year, however, the habit of S. muticum is characterised
by dramatic variation whereas the habit of H.
siliquosa is much more constant (Wernberg et al. 2001):
in spring, S. muticum grows from a small (10–15 cm)
perennial basal structure into a large (100–120 cm) erect
canopy before it senesces back in autumn, whereas H.
siliquosa retains an erect canopy of intermediate size
(~35 cm) throughout the year. We proposed that these
quantitative (host size) and qualitative (host phenology)
differences in resource (canopy habitat) availability were
important to the epibiota community, and therefore tested
the hypothesis that S. muticum and H. siliquosa support
different epibiota biomass and species composition.


xmethods
The study was conducted in Drby Vig (564909200N 085007000E),
western Limfjorden (Denmark). The study site was located on an
eastern shore protected from the predominantly westerly winds.
The surface temperature and salinity range annually from 1 to
25C and 25 to 28‰, respectively (Groos et al. 1996). S. muticum
has been present at the study site since the late 1980’s (Wernberg-
Møller et al. 1998a) and now forms dense beds from 2 to 4 m depth
(Wernberg-Møller et al. 1998b). H. siliquosa is present as scattered
individuals among the S. muticum (Wernberg-Møller et al. 1998b).
All samples were taken from within the main Sargassum bed.
Epibiota were sampled once a month from May 1997 to January
1998, except October and December. Scuba divers haphazardly
collected four to six individuals of each of S. muticum and H.
siliquosa by carefully, but swiftly, placing a 1 mm mesh bag over
the thallus of each alga (Norton and Benson 1983; Connolly 1995).
The thallus was then detached from the substratum and brought
ashore to be preserved in 70% ethanol.
In the laboratory, individually collected thalli were placed in
white plastic trays and cleaned for epibiota by gentle flushing and
brushing. Water from the trays was filtered through a 1 mm sieve to
retain the epibiota. Fresh weight (FW) of the preserved S. muticum
and H. siliquosa was measured after spinning the algal material in a
mesh bag to remove excess water (Norton and Benson 1983). The
epibiota was identified to lowest possible taxonomical level (usually
species or genus). Faunal and algal taxonomy follow Hayward
and Ryland (1996) and Nielsen et al. (1995), respectively. Individuals
were counted for all taxa except colonial taxa (e.g. Obelia
spp.) and taxa otherwise without distinct individuals (e.g. filamentous
algae). These taxa were registered as one individual. The
wet weight (WW) of the preserved epibiota was determined after
blotting with paper towels. For taxa with large individuals (e.g.
Styela clava), WW was determined for each sample; whereas in
taxa with small individuals (e.g. Phtisica marina), WW was estimated
from mean values per individual obtained from measurements
of large batches. Taxa with extremely small (often <1 mm)
and inconspicuous individuals (e.g. Nematoda spp.) were registered
as having a biomass of 0.001 g WW regardless of abundance. To
alleviate the large differences in skeletal and shell components
among taxa, epibiota WW was converted to ash free dry weight
(AFDW) by applying conversion factors from Lappalainen and
Kangas (1975), Ricciardi and Bourget (1998) and our own unpublished
data.
A total of 70 samples, 35 from each species of macroalga, covering
seven sampling times, were examined. Algal FW was used as a
proxy for canopy habitat. This was justified by tight correlations
between algal height and biomass (Wernberg et al. 2001) as well as
height and canopy volume (sensu Hacker and Steneck 1990) for
both macroalgal species (T. Wernberg, M.S. Thomsen and P.A.
Staehr, unpublished data). Because of the relative importance of
epibiota taxa with a few large or an obscure definition of individuals,
biomass (mg AFDW/100 g FW alga) was the preferred unit
for analysis and presentation, although primary data are also presented
in other units commonly encountered in the literature (see
Fig. 1).
First, using a mixed-model two-way ANOVA, we tested whether
the canopy habitat offered by the collected specimens of S.
muticum and H. siliquosa conformed to the general pattern hypothesised
to influence epibiota (H0: S. muticum and H. siliquosa
offer equal amounts of canopy habitat, and there are no temporal
differences in the amount of canopy habitat offered by either of
these species). Then, using a mixed-model two-way ANCOVA, we
tested whether S. muticum and H. siliquosa had different amounts
of associated epibiota (H0: S. muticum and H. siliquosa have equal
amounts of associated epibiota at all sampling times when adjusting
for differences in canopy habitat). In both analyses, algal species
(‘Species’) was considered a fixed factor and sampling time
(‘Time’) a random factor. Canopy habitat (thallus size, g FW) was
the covariate. These analyses were performed on a slightly modified
data set where, to balance the design, the mean of the four
samples was added to each of the May data sets, and one sample
was randomly removed from each of S. muticum/November and H.
siliquosa/July data sets (see Table 2). Prior to analysis, data were
log transformed to meet parametric assumptions of normality (c2
test, P<0.05) and homoscedasticity (Cochran’s C-test, P<0.05).
To test if there were temporal differences and if epibiota
communities were different between S. muticum and H. siliquosa, a
two-way crossed ANOSIM was performed in PRIMER (Clarke and
Gorley 2001) (H0: there are no temporal differences and there are
no differences in the epibiota communities of S. muticum and H.
siliquosa). Bray-Curtis similarity matrices were constructed from
both square root-transformed biomass data and presence/absence
(p/a)-transformed data. The first transformation was chosen to reduce
the influence of large variability among replicates, while retaining
the quantitative information on the dominance of abundant
taxa (Clarke and Warwick 1996), whereas the latter transformation
was chosen to emphasise effects purely due to species distributions.
The similarity data were plotted in nMDS plots. We used principal
axis correlation (Belbin 1995) to correlate individual taxa to the
pattern produced by the nMDS. This procedure yields a principal
axis correlation coefficient (PCC) for each taxon, which can be
interpreted as the weight of that taxon in driving the observed
patterns (Belbin 1995).

xresults
Overall, there were no statistically significant differences
in the biomass of the sampled S. muticum and H. siliquosa
thalli (Table 1). The effect of sampling time and the interaction
between host species and sampling time was,
however, highly significant. There was also a highly
significant difference in thallus biomass among species at
different sampling times. These results agree closely with
the observations of Wernberg et al. (2001), and suggest
that the canopy habitat of the sampled specimens conformed
to the quantitative and qualitative patterns hypothesised
to influence the epibiota communities.
A total of 53 epibiota taxa, representing nine animal
phyla (46 taxa) and three algal divisions (seven taxa),
were found on the 70 individuals of S. muticum and H.
siliquosa sampled (Table 2). With the exception of ‘Malacostraca
(other)’, a quantitatively insignificant group that
was found only on S. muticum, all taxa were found on
both species of macroalgae. Arthropoda (Crustacea) was
the most abundant phylum in terms of number of taxa,
and Chordata (Urochordata) in terms of biomass.
The absolute species richness of epibiota per individual
(Fig. 1A) followed the same temporal pattern on both
macroalgae, with an increasing number of associated taxa
from spring towards a summer peak in July. There was a
tendency for S. muticum to have more species early in the
year and H. siliquosa late in the year. The relative species
richness per biomass (Fig. 1B) showed a markedly different
pattern, where S. muticum had a distinct peak in
September and retained higher relative species numbers
late in the year, while H. siliquosa did not appear to have
any systematic temporal variation. The epibiota on both
macroalgae showed a distinct summer peak in absolute
(Fig. 1C) and relative (Fig. 1D) abundance. There was,
however, a time lag between maximum abundance on H.
siliquosa (July) and S. muticum (August). Biomass of
epibiota (Fig. 1E, F) had a peak in early and late summer
for S. muticum but was constant for H. siliquosa. H.
siliquosa generally supported lower epibiota biomass than
S. muticum.
The ANCOVA revealed homogeneity of slopes in regressions
between algal size (g FW) and epibiota load (g
WW/100 g FW alga) both between host species (P=0.66)
and among sampling times (P=0.99), i.e. irrespective of
host species and sampling time, the ratio of algal size to
epibiota load remained the same. Correlation analysis on
pooled data showed this common relationship between
thallus size and epibiota load to be weakly negative but
highly significant (Pearson Product Moment Correlation;
r=0.32, P=0.006, n=70). Analyses on the means adjusted
for differences in thallus size (Table 3) showed that the
two macroalgae supported significantly different epibiota
biomasses. There was no statistically significant effect of
sampling time on epibiota biomass, suggesting a temporally
constant epibiota load on both macroalgae when
adjusted for temporal variation in thallus size. This result,
however, must be interpreted cautiously as the P value
is relatively low. The interaction between species and
sampling time was highly significant, showing that time
of year exaggerated differences in epibiota loading between
the two host species.
A three-dimensional ordination of community data
(Fig. 2A–D) was necessary to obtain satisfactory stress
values. Only dimension 2 versus dimension 3 is presented
here, as this was the most informative plot in terms of
apparent groupings. With both the p/a and the square roottransformed
data, the ordination separated the samples
into broad groups corresponding to samples from the two
host species (Fig. 2A, C) and the different sampling times
(Fig. 2B, D). These groupings were highly significant
(Table 4). Global R values revealed that the species-wise
groupings were generally weaker than the time-wise
groupings, and that this pattern was most pronounced for
the p/a-transformed data. This suggests that host species
was important to epibiota biomass, whereas sampling
time was important to epibiota community composition.
The strong influence of sampling time on epibiota community
structure can be seen in Fig. 2D as a clear unidirectional
counter-clockwise succession of pair-wise
monthly samples.
It was primarily the epibiota taxa with large, abundant
individuals (Table 1), such as tunicates and crabs, that
were responsible for the pattern (Table 5) seen in Fig. 2A,
B whereas the patterns seen in Fig. 2C, D were mainly
driven by the taxa with smaller, less abundant individuals.
The differences in what taxa were driving these two ordinations
suggest that differences between host species
(more predominant with the square root-transformed data)
are caused by differences in epibiota biomass of a constant
subset of taxa rather than by differences in the kinds
of associated taxa. The importance of small, infrequent
taxa to the seasonal pattern (strongly dominant from the
p/a-transformed data) suggests that the differences among
(sampling) times are caused by differences in community
structure (i.e. species present) rather than by differences
in epibiota biomass. In other words, the main difference
between S. muticum and H. siliquous is the abundance of
epibiota, whereas the total epibiota community exhibits a
clear parallel seasonal succession on both algae.

xdiscussion
Our results show that the invasive S. muticum and the
indigenous H. siliquosa support different amounts of
epibiota, and that time of year exaggerates these differences.
Further, our results suggest that the quantitative
differences in epibiota load between S. muticum and H.
siliquosa are matched only by relatively weak differences
in epibiota community structure. Epibiota community
structure on both host species showed a clear, almost
parallel, temporal development.
Habitat architecture or complexity is important to epibiota,
particularly to small crustaceans (Hacker and Steneck
1990; Duffy and Hay 1991; Hacker and Madin 1991;
Taylor and Cole 1994). Jephson and Gray (1977) noted
that H. siliquosa generally has few epibiota species compared
to S. muticum. Although they have the same basic
morphology (Jensen 1974), the thallus of H. siliquosa
clearly has fewer and coarser branches than the annual
thallus of S. muticum. Both Hacker and Steneck (1990)
and Taylor and Cole (1994) found epifaunal densities to
be significantly higher on algae with more complex thalli,
suggesting that a similar mechanism could explain the
quantitative differences between S. muticum and H.
siliquosa in Limfjorden.
We found a negative correlation between thallus size
and the relative amount of epibiota biomass supported.
This may seem counter-intuitive, but could be interpreted
as an ‘escape by growth’ mechanism where the algae
avoid detrimental grazing by satiating herbivores (Lobban
and Harrison 1994). This is unlikely, however, as the
ANCOVA showed no differences in slopes between the
seasonally variable S. muticum and the seasonally constant
(i.e. no ‘escape growth’) H. siliquosa. We consider it
more likely that this negative correlation is an artefact of
epibiota behaviour, rather than an algal growth strategy,
as the primary site of attachment for some of the abundant
(by biomass) sessile animals (e.g. Styela clava) was
clearly around the main axis and holdfast on both host
species, as it has also been observed on other macroalgae
(Arrontes 1990). As the size of these parts of the thallus is
relatively constant across a range of algal sizes and seasons
(Wernberg-Møller et al. 1998b), the amount of
epibiota which can be supported by them is independent
of algal size. Smaller thalli will thus have a higher relative
epibiota load than larger thalli. In S. muticum, this intraindividual
epibiota distribution may be due to, or enhanced
by, high levels of phenolic compounds produced
by the rapidly growing thallus (Gorham and Lewey 1984).
Jephson and Gray (1977) made similar speculations after
observing extreme fouling of S. muticum around the time
of senescence, when the concentration of these compounds
drops (Gorham and Lewey 1984), something we
also observed in Limfjorden around August/September. In
contrast, Norton and Benson (1983) generally found more
epifauna (mainly amphipods and gastropods) on the distal
parts of the S. muticum thallus. H. siliquosa has been
observed to slough off epidermal cells, a mechanism
thought to control its epiphytes (Moss 1982).
Habitat quality (i.e. temporal stability) did not appear
to be an important factor for epibiota community structure
in Limfjorden, as S. muticum (highly variable habit) and
H. siliquosa (constant habit) had almost identical species
associated with them. Similar results were obtained by
Viejo (1999) in northern Spain and Jephson and Gray
(1977) in southern England. In New Zealand, Taylor and
Cole (1994) studied ten different brown algae and found
that most had distinct epifaunal assemblages, while individual
epifaunal taxa showed little host specificity and
were found on several host species. This general pattern
of a lack of host specificity may be an epibiota adaptation
to the fluctuating environment of temperate regions: host
phenology may not matter to many epibiota species because
they follow the same seasonality as the algae. This
is perhaps accentuated by the clear temporal change in
epibiota observed in this and many other studies from
temperate regions (Mukai 1971; Withers et al. 1975;
Jephson and Gray 1977; Arrontes 1990; Kendrick and
Burt 1997).
Crustacea comprised almost 30% of all epifaunal taxa
found in this study. Norton and Benson (1983) and Pavia
et al. (1999) found that this group of epifauna (mainly
amphipods) were highly mobile and actively selected
favourable host macroalgae. Gunnill (1982), however,
found that no amphipods were able to colonize the intertidal
fucoid Pelvetia fastigiata (J. Agardh) De Toni
over a 30 m distance, indicating that the range over which
this selective mobility occurs is limited. Dispersal barriers
may be a real problem in the establishment and development
of an H. siliquosa epibiota community in Limfjorden
because the individual plants are scattered several
metres apart among the S. muticum individuals (Wernberg-
Møller et al. 1998b).
Using a similar approach to us, Viejo (1999) estimated
the impact of S. muticum invasion on mobile epifauna
by comparing contemporary patterns of abundance and
species distributions among S. muticum and indigenous
equivalents (Cystoseira nodicaulis and Fucus vesiculosus).
As she found no major differences in mobile epibiota
associated with any of these algae, she concluded
that local epibiota colonised S. muticum equally well as
they colonised either of the indigenous host species, and
thus that there was no effect of its invasion. Since no preinvasion
data were available, such an argument assumes
that the total epibiota community had not already been
changed, and this in turn probably depends on a combination
of the relative abundance of the invader and the
time it had been present or dominant in the system. This
seriously reduces the power of any conclusion derived
from a retained null hypothesis (i.e. no differences among
invader and indigenous species). S. muticum has been a
dominant component of the macroalgal flora at our study
site for more than 10 years (Wernberg-Møller et al.
1998a), and because of large differences in abundance of
the two macroalgae (Wernberg et al. 2001) it cannot be
ruled out that the epibiota community structure radically
changed with the invasion of S. muticum and that the
contemporary epibiota community structure of H. siliquosa
is, to a large degree, the result of a ‘spill-over’ effect.
The observed quantitative differences in epibiota between
S. muticum and H. siliquosa are, however, independent of
this, and thus a real consequence of the introduction of S.
muticum.
Based on the findings of this study, we find it unlikely
that the introduction of S. muticum to Limfjorden has
caused any major changes in local macroalgal epibiota
community structure. It does, however, appear that the
system now supports a much higher standing stock of
epibiota than was previously the case. This appears to be a
general pattern in the systems invaded by S. muticum, as
similar conclusions were reached by Wither et al. (1975)
in southern England and by Viejo (1999) in northern
Spain. The consequences of these quantitative changes
are unknown at the system level, but they could include
altered food webs because of increased availability of
food items or increased grazing on algal propagules and
recruits, perhaps reinforcing the position of S. muticum as
a dominant due to the regenerative abilities of the genus
(Kendrick and Walker 1994).