xabstract
Aquatic macrophytes play an important role in the survival and proliferation of invertebrates in freshwater ecosystems.
Epiphytic invertebrate communities may be altered through the replacement of native macrophytes by exotic macrophytes,
even when the macrophytes are close relatives and have similar morphology. We sampled an invasive exotic
macrophyte, Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum), and native milfoils Myriophyllum sibericum and Myriophyllum
alterniflorum in four bodies of water in southern Quebec and upstate New York during the summer of 2005. Within
each waterbody, we compared the abundance, diversity, and community composition of epiphytic macroinvertebrates on
exotic and native Myriophyllum. In general, both M. sibericum and M. alterniflorum had higher invertebrate diversity and
higher invertebrate biomass and supported more gastropods than the exotic M. spicatum. In late summer, invertebrate density
tended to be higher on M. sibericum than on M. spicatum, but lower on M. alterniflorum than on M. spicatum. Our results
demonstrate that M. spicatum supports macroinvertebrate communities that may differ from those on structurally
similar native macrophytes, although these differences vary across sites and sampling dates. Thus, the replacement of native
milfoils by M. spicatum may have indirect effects on aquatic food webs.

xintroduction
Aquatic macrophytes play key ecological roles in lakes
and rivers, primarily as a source of primary productivity
and as a habitat for abundant and diverse faunal communities
(Kershner and Lodge 1990; Killgore et al. 1991; Toft
et al. 2003). In particular, submersed macrophyte beds support
dense communities of invertebrates and thus serve as
important feeding areas for fish (Rozas and Odum 1988;
Strayer and Malcom 2007). Such communities are being
transformed by introductions of invasive exotic macrophytes
that dominate or replace native macrophytes (Boylen et al.
1999; Myers and Bazely 2003). Exotic macrophytes can alter
the physical and chemical environment, particularly
when their growth form and life history traits differ from
those of the native species they replace (Carpenter and
Lodge 1986; Cattaneo et al. 1998; Caraco and Cole 2002).
However, the effects of macrophyte species replacements
on aquatic communities remain relatively unexplored (but
see Keast 1984; Strayer et al. 2003; Toft et al. 2003). It is
of interest to know if morphologically similar exotic and native
macrophytes will support similar epiphytic macroinvertebrate
communities.
Within a given ecosystem, native macrophytes and their
associated invertebrates may have interacted over the course
of their evolution. If shared evolutionary history matters,
then we would expect native macrophytes to support more
diverse invertebrate communities than exotic macrophytes
in North American inland waters because the vast majority
of freshwater invertebrate species in North America are native
(Pennak 1989; Merritt and Cummins 1996). Furthermore,
exotic macrophytes might facilitate the establishment
and population growth of exotic invertebrates, particularly if
these species have shared an evolutionary history — a prediction
of the ‘‘invasional meltdown’’ hypothesis (Simberloff
and Von Holle 1999). Exotic macrophytes might also act as
a vector for the introduction of exotic invertebrates (Johnson
et al. 2001; Toft et al. 2003). For these reasons, we would
expect to find more exotic invertebrates living on exotic
macrophytes.
Physical and chemical properties of aquatic macrophytes
may influence the abundance, diversity, and community
composition of epiphytic invertebrates, potentially resulting
in different invertebrate communities associated with different
macrophyte species (Cyr and Downing 1988; Chilton
1990; Cheruvelil et al. 2002). Structurally complex macrophytes
with finely divided leaves tend to support higher densities
of epiphytic invertebrates compared with those with
simple leaves (Krull 1970; Cheruvelil et al. 2000, 2002).
The chemicals exuded by aquatic macrophytes may also directly
affect the abundance of certain invertebrates (Marko
et al. 2005), whereas other exudates may influence the
growth of epiphytic algae — an important invertebrate food
source (Wium-Andersen et al. 1982; Cattaneo 1983; Gross
et al. 1996). Therefore, it follows that even macrophytes
with similar structure may support contrasting invertebrate
communities.
Our objective was to determine if the invasive exotic
macrophyte Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum)
supports invertebrate communities equivalent in composition,
diversity, and abundance to those on structurally similar
native Myriophyllum species. Myriophyllum spicatum
was introduced into North America in the early 1900s,
reaching the St. Lawrence River by 1957 (Aiken et al.
1979; Smith and Barko 1990). It is now distributed across
North America, where it often outcompetes native milfoils
and other aquatic macrophytes through crowding and shading
(Boylen et al. 1999). Milfoils are submersed, canopyforming
macrophytes that occur either in mixed or monospecific
beds in ponds, lakes, and lentic areas of large rivers
(Aiken et al. 1979). Milfoils generally have finely divided,
feathery leaves arranged in whorls of four around the stem.
Native milfoils Myriophyllum sibiricum and Myriophyllum
alterniflorum and the exotic Myriophyllum spicatum are
very similar in their growth form and leaf morphology
(Gerber and Les 1994; Crow and Hellquist 2000); M. sibiricum
and M. spicatum have similar-sized leaves, whereas M.
alterniflorum has slightly smaller leaves. If leaf structure
(i.e., complex versus simple leaves) largely determines epiphytic
invertebrate abundance and diversity, milfoils should
support similar invertebrate communities. However, assuming
that biochemical or subtle physical differences between
these species may provoke adaptations in epiphytic invertebrates
(Gross et al. 1996; Marko et al. 2005), we hypothesized
that native species of Myriophyllum support more
abundant and diverse invertebrate communities than M. spicatum
because of their shared evolutionary history with native
invertebrates. Particular attention was given to
gastropods because of their important contribution to epiphytic
invertebrate biomass. We also hypothesized that M.
spicatum supports more abundant and diverse exotic invertebrates
than native species of Myriophyllum. We tested these
hypotheses in a multisite field study in which the density,
biomass, diversity, and community composition of epiphytic
invertebrates on the exotic M. spicatum were compared with
native M. sibiricum and M. alterniflorum.

xmethods
Macrophytes and their associated epiphytic invertebrates
were sampled on multiple occasions at four sites in eastern
North America: the Richelieu River and Lac St-Louis (a fluvial
lake on the St. Lawrence River) in southern Quebec and
Upper Saranac Lake and Upper Chateaugay Lake in the
Adirondack State Park in upstate New York (Fig. 1). These
lakes and rivers represent a range of freshwater habitats in
which native and exotic Myriophyllum co-occur (Table 1).
Prior to sampling, we visually surveyed plants in each
waterbody in June or July and selected a site within each
where the relative abundance (percent cover) of both native
and exotic Myriophyllum species was approximately equal.
All subsequent samples were then taken from the same site.
In Lac St-Louis and the Richelieu River, we sampled M.
spicatum and the native M. sibericum, whereas in Saranac
Lake and Chateaugay Lake, we sampled M. spicatum and
the native M. alterniflorum. Two weeks prior to sampling,
Saranac Lake was undergoing a milfoil control program
wherein M. spicatum was manually harvested at discrete periods
by divers who took care to leave native macrophytes
intact and minimize disturbance in the lake. As a result, the
relative abundance of the two species varied throughout the
season at this site. At all four waterbodies, we sampled two
to three times at monthly intervals in the summer of 2005.

At each site, a snorkeler or SCUBA diver collected macrophytes
and epiphytic invertebrates using a modified
Downing box sampler, a plexiglas box that encloses plant
material and associated invertebrates in 6 L of water
(Downing 1986; Rasmussen 1988). On one side of this box
is a screen (0.5 mm) to drain water while keeping macroinvertebrates
and macrophytes inside. Within each site, we
limited the depth variation at which samples were taken to
within 1 m. Macrophytes were identified in the field prior
to sampling. Because M. spicatum and M. sibericum are
sometimes difficult to distinguish (Crow and Hellquist
2000), we only sampled at sites where morphological differences
between the two species were sufficiently pronounced
to ensure correct identification. At each site, we collected 6–
10 replicate samples of each macrophyte species, except at
Saranac Lake where additional samples were taken because
there were relatively few invertebrates on the macrophytes.
The number of samples taken at each site depended on the
density of invertebrates and the availability of macrophytes,
but sampling effort was equal for both native and exotic
macrophytes. Samples were taken from the interior of a
mixed bed of macrophytes at sites within 20 m of the shoreline.
We made an effort to collect native and exotic macrophytes
from similar locations within each site. At each site
on each sampling date, we measured water temperature and
depth, identified the other macrophyte species present, and
took water samples that were transported in a cooler to the
lab within 3 h and kept refrigerated (for <48 h) until their
pH was measured using a digital meter (AP63 pH meter,
Accumet Portable Laboratory, Fisher Scientific, Ottawa, Ontario).

In the field, we placed macrophytes from each sample
into plastic trays and removed loose invertebrates from both
the tray and sampler using forceps. Invertebrates were immediately
preserved in 70% ethanol. The macrophytes from
each sample were then stored in separate plastic bags and
transported to the lab in a cooler, where they were refrigerated
and processed within 48 h of collection. Working under
a dissection microscope, we removed all of the remaining
invertebrates from the macrophytes using forceps and preserved
them in 70% ethanol. Macrophytes were subsequently
rinsed of debris (e.g., silt and marl), blotted to
remove excess water, dried in an oven at 65 8C for 16 h until
a stable weight was reached, and then weighed on an
electronic balance (±0.01 g).
We identified preserved invertebrates to the lowest taxonomic
level possible under a dissection microscope. Because
the mass of individual species and genera was often insignificantly
small, we measured the wet weight (±0.001 g) of invertebrates
grouped according to their taxonomic order in
each sample. The range of biomass was too small to be
measured with any more accuracy using dry weights.
Although preservation alters the wet weight of invertebrates,
all samples were stored in the same conditions (i.e., temperature
and light) and weighed within the same week to minimize
error due to desiccation. Invertebrate grouped wet
weights were measured within <10 s of their removal from
ethanol after gentle blotting with tissue paper.

Invertebrate density (number of invertebrates per gram of
plant dry weight) and biomass (wet weight of invertebrates
per gram of plant dry weight) were calculated for each sample
and ln-transformed prior to statistical analysis to meet
assumptions of normality. Homogeneity of variance across
sampling groups at each site was verified using Levene’s
test. A repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was used to compare the mean invertebrate density on native
and exotic Myriophyllum at each site, with date as the
within-subjects factor and plant type (native or exotic) as
the between-subjects factor; the same was done for invertebrate
biomass. At one site (Richelieu River), a significant
interaction effect between sampling date and macrophyte
species was found, which prompted us to run post hoc comparisons
in each date using Bonferroni-corrected t tests.
Densities of exotic invertebrate species on native and exotic
Myriophyllum were compared using repeated-measures ANOVA
when the abundance of an exotic invertebrate species
was normally distributed across a site. Otherwise, we used
two-tailed t tests to compare the density of an exotic invertebrate
species on each sampling date that density was normally
distributed — which occurred for all dates except
when no exotic invertebrates were found on either native or
exotic macrophytes. All statistical tests were preformed using
SPSS version 14.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois).
To measure invertebrate diversity, we calculated taxa
richness, the Shannon–Wiener index, and the inverted Simpson
index. The latter indices are calculated based on both
taxa richness and evenness, but the Shannon–Wiener index
is influenced more by taxa richness than by the Simpson index
(Magurran 2004). For each site, we created individualbased
Coleman rarefaction curves for taxa richness and accumulation
curves for Shannon–Wiener and inverse Simpson
diversity on native and exotic Myriophyllum (Colwell
2005). The curves were generated separately for native and
exotic macrophytes at each site and were used to compare
invertebrate diversity on two species of macrophytes while
controlling for differences in the total abundance of invertebrates
on the different macrophyte species. Shannon–Wiener
diversity and inverse Simpson diversity were calculated
based on 50 randomizations sampled with replacement to
generate error bars (Colwell 2005). We also ran a detrended
correspondence analysis (DCA) to reveal trends in inverte-
brate community composition at each site, using CANOCO
version 4.5 (Biometris, Wageningen). Before running a
DCA, we excluded rare taxa, which were defined as those
species present in less than three replicate samples at a site
throughout the season.

xresults
At three of the four sites, invertebrate biomass was significantly
higher on native Myriophyllum species than on
M. spicatum during at least one sampling period in the
summer (ANOVA, p < 0.05; Fig. 2). In early to midsummer,
invertebrate biomass was higher on native
M. sibericum than on M. spicatum in Lac St-Louis by a factor
of 2.2, whereas from June to August, total invertebrate
biomass declined on both macrophyte species. In the Richelieu
River, the invertebrate biomass on M. sibiricum was
slightly lower than on M. spicatum in early summer but by
late summer was 2.3 times greater than on M. spicatum. In
Chateaugay Lake, M. alterniflorum had twice as much invertebrate
biomass than M. spicatum during August, whereas
at Saranac Lake, both species had similar invertebrate biomass
throughout the season. Gastropod biomass, which constituted
a substantial portion (>60% at three sites) of the
total invertebrate biomass, was also significantly higher on
native macrophytes at Lac St-Louis, Chateaugay Lake, and
Richelieu River sites (ANOVA, p < 0.05). In Saranac Lake,
M. spicatum and M. alterniflorum supported similar gastropod
biomass (Fig. 3).
Within each site, invertebrate density tended to differ on
native and exotic Myriophyllum, especially in mid- to late
summer (Fig. 4). Invertebrate density was higher on M. sibericum
than on M. spicatum (ANOVA, p < 0.05). Mean invertebrate
density on M. sibericum was higher than on
M. spicatum by a factor of 1.5 in Lac St-Louis (August)
and by a factor of 2.2 in the Richelieu River (September).
Invertebrate density tended to be higher on M. spicatum
than on M. alterniflorum, although only significantly so at
Chateaugay Lake (ANOVA, p < 0.05). In August, average
invertebrate density on M. alterniflorum was lower than on
M. spicatum by a factor of 2.2 in Chateaugay Lake and by
a factor of 1.8 in Saranac Lake. The mean body size (estimated
from the ratio of biomass to density) of invertebrates
on M. spicatum was generally lower than on
M. alterniflorum (Figs. 2 and 4).

In general, the two native species of Myriophyllum supported
either equivalent or greater invertebrate diversity
than M. spicatum. Invertebrate taxa richness was consistently
higher on M. alterniflorum than on M. spicatum (p <
0.05; Fig. 5; Table 2). Invertebrate taxa richness was also
higher on M. sibericum than on M. spicatum in the Richelieu
River (p < 0.05), whereas in Lac St-Louis, both macrophytes
species supported similar taxa richness. Shannon–
Wiener diversity followed the same pattern as taxa richness
(Fig. 6; Table 2). The inverse Simpson index showed a similar
pattern, with the exception of Saranac Lake; at this site,
M. alterniflorum tended to have higher inverse Simpson diversity
of invertebrates than M. spicatum, but the difference
was not significant (Table 2). Thus, across all sites, taxa
richness, Shannon–Wiener diversity, and the inverse Simpson
diversity index of invertebrates on native milfoils were
equal to or significantly higher than on M. spicatum
(Table 2).
Although native and exotic Myriophyllum supported many
of the same invertebrate species, the abundance of certain
invertebrate groups (e.g., gastropods) was often different on
each milfoil species. At three of our four sites, both species
of native Myriophyllum had higher gastropod biomass per
gram of plant dry weight than M. spicatum (ANOVA, p <
0.05). The differences between invertebrate community
composition on M. alterniflorum and M. spicatum were particularly
distinct in Chateaugay Lake. At this site, detrended
correspondence analysis showed that samples divided along
two axes: the first representing plant type, and the second
representing sampling date (Figs. 7a, 7b). Generally, M. spicatum
supported many chironomids and oligochaetes,
whereas M. alterniflorum supported many amphipods and
gastropods. Invertebrate communities associated with M.
spicatum were characterized by an abundance of naidid oligochaetes
(Ni), chironomids (Ch), caddisflies of the hydroptilid
genus Oxyethira (Hx), and the Eurasian pyralid moth,
Acentria ephemerella ( = Acentria nivea) (Ac) (Fig. 7b). Invertebrates
characteristic of M. alterniflorum were the gastropods
Valvata sincera (Vs) and Amnicola limosa (Am),
the amphipod Hyallela azteca (Hy), damselflies in the fam-
ily Coenagrionidae (Co), and caddisflies of the genus Orthotricha
(Ho). Invertebrate communities were also different in
early and late summer, with more planarians on both macrophyte
species in July and more caddisflies in August
(Fig. 7b). In Saranac Lake, differences in invertebrate communities
were not clearly defined by either date or macrophyte
species.
Invertebrate community composition also differed between
M. spicatum and M. sibericum in the Richelieu River
(Figs. 7c, 7d), while such differences were less apparent in
Lac St-Louis. In the Richelieu River, as in Chateaugay
Lake, M. spicatum supported many chironomids and oligochaetes,
whereas M. sibericum supported many amphipods
and snails. Invertebrate communities characteristic of
M. spicatum were dominated by chironomids (Ch), oligochaetes
(Ni, St), and the caddisfly Brachycentrus sp. (Br)
throughout the sampling period. Invertebrate communities
on M. sibericum were characterized by the amphipod Hyalella
azteca (Hy), the gastropods Physa gyrina gyrina (Ph),
Gyraulus circumstriatus (Gy), and Amnicola limosa (Am),
the planarian Dugesia tigrina (Du), ostracods (Os), and in
September, the Eurasian zebra mussel, Dreissena polymorpha
(Dr). Generally, the invertebrate composition on M. spicatum
did not vary throughout the season, whereas those on
M. sibericum changed in each sampling period: in July, M.
sibericum had many gastropods and amphipods; in August,
invertebrates were similar to those on M. spicatum, with
many naidid oligochaetes (Ni), chironomids (Ch), and Brachycentrus
sp. (Br); in September, M. sibericum supported
many zebra mussels (Figs. 7c, 7d). In Lac St-Louis, gastropods
were significantly higher on M. sibericum than on M.
spicatum (ANOVA, p < 0.05), but otherwise invertebrate
communities were not clearly differentiated by either date
or macrophyte species.

Three species of exotic invertebrates were found. The
Eurasian moth Acentria ephemerella was present at all four
sites and was higher on M. spicatum than on the native
Myriophyllum species at every site. In Saranac Lake, we
found only two specimens of A. ephemerella in one sample
of M. spicatum and none on M. alterniflorum. In Chateaugay
Lake, A. ephemerella again was not found on M. alterniflorum
but was present in 38% of the samples of M.
spicatum and thus was grouped with M. spicatum in the
DCA analysis (Figs. 7a, 7b). In the Richelieu River and
Lac St-Louis, A. ephemerella occurred on both M. sibericum
and M. spicatum but was more likely to group with
the Eurasian milfoil in the Richelieu River (Figs. 7c, 7d).
In the Richelieu River, A. ephemerella was present in 38%
of the M. spicatum samples and 27% of the M. sibericum
samples, and in Lac St-Louis, these frequencies were 16%
and 10%, respectively.
In Lac St-Louis, the abundance of the Eurasian snail Bithynia
tentaculata did not differ significantly between M. sibericum
and M. spicatum on any of the sampling dates
(Fig. 8a). In the Richelieu River, the density of Dreissena
polymorpha was significantly higher on M. sibericum than
on M. spicatum in September after the peak period of zebra
mussel settlement (t test, p < 0.01; Fig. 8b).

xdiscussion
Our results show that invertebrate community structure
can differ substantially on exotic and native milfoils of similar
morphology. However, the relationship between invertebrate
abundance on these macrophytes varies throughout the
summer, with differences in invertebrate density becoming
more pronounced later in the season. Given that M. spicatum
grows rapidly in the spring (Grace and Wetzel 1978), it may
be the first macrophyte species to provide substrate and resources
to colonizing invertebrates. Indeed, at our sampling
sites, M. spicatum grew earlier than both species of native
Myriophyllum, but contrary to the expectation that M. spicatum
would support more invertebrates early in the summer,
there was generally no difference in invertebrate density at
that time. Invertebrates may require a few months to differentially
colonize macrophyte species, and it may be that
subtle differences among macrophytes (e.g., involving
chemical exudates or epiphytic algal communities; Balci
and Kennedy 2003; Marko et al. 2005) have significant effects
on invertebrate abundance only by late summer.
Different species of aquatic macrophytes support epiphytic
algal communities that may differ greatly in abundance
and taxonomic composition (Blindow 1987; Cattaneo
et al. 1998; Laugaste and Reunanen 2005). Algae growing
on macrophytes in the St. Lawrence River and surrounding
areas reach peak biomass by mid-June or July (Cattaneo
1983; Gosselain et al. 2005), and so we would expect differences
in the epiphytic algal communities of native and
exotic Myriophyllum to be more apparent in midsummer.
Contrasting abundances or composition of epiphytic algae
on macrophyte species could drive dissimilarities in epiphytic
invertebrate communities that are structured around
algae as a food source; for example, Cattaneo (1983) found
that the abundance of invertebrate grazers increased substantially
a short time after peak epiphyte biomass.
Our study examined gastropod biomass in particular, because
gastropods graze on epiphytic algae and consume
macrophytes directly (Lodge 1986; Sheldon 1987; Bro¨nmark
1989) and also they comprised a substantial proportion of
invertebrate biomass in our samples. They had significantly
higher biomass on native Myriophyllum species at three of
the four sites. Myriophyllum sibericum and M. spicatum
have very similar structure and approximately equal plant
surface area per gram of dry plant weight (Gerber and Les
1994), so differences in gastropod biomass between the two
species cannot be attributed to the area available for colonization
by gastropods or epiphytic algae. Given that gastropod
abundance may vary with epiphytic algal biomass and
composition (Lodge 1986; Bro¨nmark 1989), differences in
the epiphytes themselves on native and exotic milfoils may
be driving this result. Whatever the mechanism, gastropods
have been found to preferentially inhabit certain macrophyte
species over others, even when these macrophytes are
closely related (Pip and Stewart 1976; Sheldon 1987).
The mean body size of invertebrates was also lower on
M. spicatum than on M. alterniflorum, as indicated by an
equal or higher invertebrate biomass combined with a lower
invertebrate density on M. alterniflorum. This result may reflect
differences in invertebrate community composition, as
M. alterniflorum supported larger snails and amphipods,
whereas M. spicatum was dominated by smaller annelids
and chironomids.

Submersed aquatic macrophytes are often grouped into
two main structural categories based on leaf morphology:
dissected (complex) leaves or entire (simple) leaves
(Krecker 1939; Cheruvelil et al. 2002). By these standards,
the three species of Myriophyllum in our study are similar
in structure as all have dissected leaves arranged in whorls
of four around the stem. On a finer scale, however, there
are structural differences among species. Myriophyllum alterniflorum
tends to branch more frequently and has slightly
smaller leaves than either M. spicatum or M. sibericum.
Myriophyllum alterniflorum also has significantly higher
specific leaf area (surface area of leaf per dry weight of
leaf) and surface area to volume ratios than the other species,
whereas M. spicatum and M. sibericum have very similar
specific leaf area and leaf surface area to volume ratios
(Gerber and Les 1994). In addition, dry leaf mass comprises
~55% of the total dry weight of leaves and shoots of M. alterniflorum
and ~65% for both M. spicatum and M. sibericum
(Gerber and Les 1994). Hence, subtle differences in
leaf morphology exist between M. alterniflorum and M. spicatum,
but M. spicatum and M. sibericum have quite similar
leaf morphology. The range of whole plant surface area –
biomass ratios on M. spicatum and M. sibericum also overlap,
varying between 320 and 1205 cm2g–1 on M. spicatum
(Kowalczewski 1975; Sher-Kaul et al. 1995) and between
534 and 761 cm2g–1 on M. sibericum (Gerrish and Bristow
1979; Armstrong et al. 2003). Thus, although subtle structural
differences may account for the dissimilarity in invertebrate
communities on M. alterniflorum and M. spicatum,
they are less likely to be responsible for differences in invertebrates
on M. sibericum and M. spicatum.
It seems probable that characteristics other than plant
structure influence invertebrate abundance and diversity on
these macrophytes. Chemical exudates may affect the relative
palatability of exotic and native milfoils to herbivores
and the growth of epiphytic algae. Marko et al. (2005) found
that the milfoil weevil, a specialist herbivore native to North
America, prefers M. spicatum to its native host M. sibericum
because of differences in the amount of glycerol and uracil
exuded by the two species. Previous studies have also found
that M. spicatum releases chemicals that deter the growth of
certain types of epiphytes and that these chemicals may dif-
fer in either the type or the amount exuded relative to other
species of Myriophyllum (Gross et al. 1996).

The invasional meltdown hypothesis postulates that previously
established exotic species facilitate the invasion or
proliferation of other exotic species (Simberloff and Von
Holle 1999) and thus predicts that M. spicatum would support
more exotic invertebrates than either M. sibericum or
M. alterniflorum. However, this prediction is not supported
by the results of our study. The abundance of the Eurasian
snail Bithynia tentaculata was not significantly different on
native and exotic macrophytes. Bithynia tentaculata established
in the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River basin
more than a century ago, several decades prior to the invasion
of M. spicatum (Aiken et al. 1979; Mills et al. 1993),
and therefore may have had sufficient time to adapt to native
macrophytes. In the Richelieu River, the native M. sibericum
supported more zebra mussels than M. spicatum. It
seems unlikely that differences in plant exudates or epiphytic
algae would have caused this result, as zebra mussels
are filter feeders with larvae that are planktonic and eventually
settle on solid surfaces, including submersed macrophytes.
Given that larval dispersal is largely determined by
vagaries of water currents (Lewandowski 1982), it is likely
that small-scale variation in hydrology within a site determines
the degree to which the mussels colonize macrophytes.
The Eurasian moth A. ephemerella was the only exotic invertebrate
that appeared to preferentially colonize M. spicatum.
The density of A. ephemerella was slightly higher on
M. spicatum than on either native species of Myriophyllum
at all four sites, and DCA analysis showed that this moth
tended to group with M. spicatum in the Richelieu River
and Chateaugay Lake. Not a single A. ephemerella was collected
from samples of M. alterniflorum in either Chateaugay
Lake or Saranac Lake, whereas at both of these sites,
A. ephemerella was found on M. spicatum, perhaps indicating
that A. ephemerella prefers to colonize the exotic milfoil.
This moth was introduced from Europe and was first
discovered in the St. Lawrence River in 1927 (Berg 1942;
Sheppard 1945). It is a generalist herbivore that feeds on
many species of macrophytes (Buckingham and Ross 1981)
but has been considered as a possible biological control
agent for M. spicatum as it may cause less damage to native
macrophytes (Johnson et al. 1997).

To our knowledge, this is the first study to compare multispecies
invertebrate assemblages on native and exotic species
of Myriophyllum. Previous studies that examined differences
between epiphytic invertebrates on M. spicatum and native
macrophytes found conflicting results (Table 3), perhaps because
each compared M. spicatum with macrophytes of differing
phylogeny, structure, and life history traits.
The establishment of M. spicatum can reduce the density
of many other species of macrophytes, including native milfoils
(Grace and Wetzel 1978; Smith and Barko 1990; Boylen
et al. 1999). In situations where M. spicatum supports
lower invertebrate diversity and biomass than its congeners,
the displacement of native macrophytes by M. spicatum
could conceivably cause habitat-wide alterations in epiphytic
invertebrate communities that have consequences for higher
trophic levels. Reductions in the diversity, biomass, and
mean body size of epiphytic invertebrates may impact fish
and other vertebrate predators by lowering the quality and
accessibility of prey (Werner and Hall 1974; Eggers 1977;
Kovecses et al. 2005). Overall, these results suggest that the
impacts of M. spicatum invasion on epiphytic invertebrates
may have multiple indirect effects at local and habitat-wide
scales. Structurally similar, even congeneric, macrophytes
do not necessarily provide equivalent habitat for invertebrate
communities, which appear to be sensitive to subtle differences
between macrophyte species.
