xabstract

Species with complex life cycles are good models to understand trade-offs between life in hostile and
favourable habitats. Newts remain in breeding wetlands for a long period and are strongly affected by
fish introduction; however, mechanisms of the exclusion observed in the field are still not well known. In
particular, whether newts skip breeding and leave water for land in response to fish introduction and
how aquatic shelter may influence their choice remain open questions. To investigate these questions, we
experimentally studied the use of aquatic and terrestrial habitats during the breeding season of palmate
newts, Lissotriton helveticus, in the presence and absence of goldfish, Carassius auratus. We determined
the consequences of habitat choice on newt fitness by assessing sexual activity and number of eggs.
There was a strong, significant avoidance of the aquatic environment in the presence of fish, particularly
when no aquatic shelter was available. This escape from the water had an impact on reproduction: newts
decreased their sexual activity and laid fewer eggs. The availability of shelters favoured coexistence but
did not prevent a large proportion of the newts from leaving water and skipping reproduction. This study
shows how the presence of fish and the absence of aquatic shelters can lead to newts forgoing aquatic
life, thus improving our understanding of the mechanisms behind the coexistence and exclusion patterns
found in the wild. More broadly, these data contribute to explaining aquatic versus terrestrial life in
favourable and unfavourable environments.


xintroduction


Many species have a complex life cycle that requires both
terrestrial and aquatic habitats; while wintering and aestivating
often take place on land, reproduction is exclusively aquatic
(Pittman, Osbourn, & Semlitsch, 2014; Wells, 2007; Wilbur, 1980).
Theoretical models have proposed that the selection of terrestrial
and aquatic habitats depends on their respective costs and benefits
(Werner, 1986; Wilbur & Collins, 1973). In particular, habitat choice
has functional relationships with reproduction and survival, and,
consequently, fitness covaries directly with habitat use (Morris,
2011). Both abiotic and biotic habitat characteristics have been
shown to affect habitat selection (Albeny-Sim~oes et al., 2014;
Amburgey, Bailey, Murphy, Muths, & Funk, 2014; Indermaur,
Schaub, Jokela, Tockner, & Schmidt, 2010). For instance, adult amphibians
can shorten the time spent in water when the density is
too high (Grayson & Wilbur, 2009), while they can remain aquatic
during winter to avoid colder conditions on land (Pilliod, Peterson,
& Ritson, 2002). During reproduction, a pond's hydroperiod
strongly regulates the habitat suitability for aquatic-breeding
species (McCaffery, Eby, Maxell, & Corn, 2014; Williams, Heeg, &
Magnusson, 2007), but habitat quality is also determined by
resource competition and predation risk (Indermaur et al., 2010;
Rieger, Binckley, & Resetarits, 2004).
The presence of potential predators, such as fish, is a critical
determinant of the occurrence and abundance of prey, including
organisms as varied as amphibians and insects (Binckley &
Resetarits, 2008; Blaustein, Kiflawi, Eitam, Mangel, & Cohen,
2004). It is believed that the evolution of pond-breeding species,
such as newts,was made possible because such habitats are usually
devoid of fish or because predatory pressure is limited. Indeed, in
contrast to many anurans, newts are long-term breeders that
remain in the water for weeks or even months to actively court and
lay eggs one by one (Wells, 2007). The selection of a suitable
breeding habitat is, therefore, of primary importance both for the
adult newts' offspring and for themselves. The introduction of alien
species, such as fish in naturally fish-free environments, thus
constitutes a major threat by risking amphibians' use of the aquatic
environment (McGeoch et al., 2010). Among other factors, this
contributes to the current amphibian decline, which has been
identified as part of the sixth world mass extinction (Stuart et al.,
2004; Wake & Vredenburg, 2008). A large number of environmental
studies support these conclusions by showing exclusion patterns between fish and pond-breeding amphibians (Kats &
Ferrer, 2003), amphibian extirpations after fish introduction
(Pilliod et al., 2010) and resilience after fish removal (Knapp,
Boiano, & Vredenburg, 2007; Vredenburg, 2004).
The disappearance of many amphibian populations after fish
introductions can have different causes. The two primary reported
detrimental effects are direct predation on adults, larvae and/or
eggs (Leu, L¸scher, Zumbach, & Schmidt, 2009; Monello & Wright,
2001; Orizaola & Bra~na, 2006) and competition through the consumption
of important resources such as food (Joseph, Piovia-Scott,
Lawler, & Pope, 2011). An additional mechanism that can lead to
exclusion patterns is avoidance behaviour. On the one hand, the
adults can check breeding sites and avoid those occupied by potential
predators such as fish (Binckley & Resetarits, 2003; Hopey &
Petranka,1994; Orizaola & Bra~na, 2003a; Rieger et al., 2004). On the
other hand, behavioural avoidance can be expressed in the aquatic
habitat where amphibians can increase the use of microhabitats as
shelter in the presence of fish (Orizaola & Bra~na, 2003b; Teplitsky,
Plenet, & Joly, 2003). This is nevertheless a costly antipredator
response, as it can impair fitness through a reduction of important
activities, such as foraging and reproduction (Lima, 1998; Winandy
& DenoÄel, 2013a, 2013b).
An important nonconsumptive effect that has not been studied
so far is whether the absence of newts from fish habitats is due to
their transient or permanent escape from the aquatic environment
to the terrestrial habitat and whether the availability of aquatic
shelter could affect this behavioural choice (for instance, by
allowing coexistence between newts and fish). Understanding
these patterns is essential to explaining the use of aquatic versus
terrestrial environments by amphibians in fish and fishless habitats
(Langerhans, 2007).
To test these hypotheses, we monitored the aquatic versus
terrestrial use of habitats and the associated fitness consequences
in the palmate newt, Lissotriton helveticus, in response to the
presence of goldfish, Carassius auratus (Fig.1).We used goldfish as a
model species because this is the most introduced and invasive
ornamental fish in the world (Maceda-Veiga, Escribano-Alacid, de
Sostoa, & GarcÌa-Berthou, 2013) and because it has caused
amphibian decline (Meyer, Schmidt, & Grossenbacher, 1998). Both
exclusion and coexistence patterns between newts and goldfish
have been found, but the mechanisms that may explain these observations
are still not well known (DenoÄel, Dzukic, & Kalezic,
2005; DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2014). Goldfish can forage on eggs and
larvae of salamanders (Monello & Wright, 2001), but are not
thought to predate on adult newts. This suggests that exclusion
patterns observed in the field can be particularly explained by
nonconsumptive processes such as behavioural avoidance
(Winandy & DenoÄel, 2013b).We chose palmate newts because they
are in decline and are affected by goldfish in the wild (DenoÄel, 2012;
DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2014). Our approach was experimental, using a
laboratory replicated design during the entire breeding period of
newts. We assessed a gradient of behavioural responses considering
four different treatments mimicking high- to poor-quality
aquatic habitats using both biotic and abiotic factors: no fish with
aquatic shelter, no fish without aquatic shelter, fish with aquatic
shelter and fish without aquatic shelter. Along this environmental
gradient, we expected an increase in the use of the terrestrial
habitat and a decrease in sexual activity and reproductive success of the newts.
xmethods
Study Organism and Laboratory Maintenance
We caught 96 palmate newts by dip netting (48 individuals of
each sex) at the beginning of the reproductive period (11 March
2014) in a fishless pool (Romeree, Belgium: 50080N, 4400E).
Newts had no prior experience with fish because no fish were
found in the varied waterbodies within the usual dispersal distances
of newts (i.e. up to 400 m) around the capture site. In their
natural habitat, they coexisted with alpine newts, Ichthyosaura
alpestris. After capture, we directly brought newts to the
laboratory, keeping sexes separated, in several tanks (2 h transport);
six 9-litre tanks filled with water and stuffed with towels
were placed in two large refrigerated boxes of 230 litres. At the
end of the experiment, all newts were released in good health
into their capture pond (26 May 2014) in accordance with capture
permits.
In the laboratory, we distributed the newts between 24 identical
and independent aquaria (60  60 cm, 40 cm water level; 135
litres) with four individuals (two males and two females) per
aquarium. Before their release in the aquaria, we carefully
measured them using a ruler. They had a mean ± SE snoutevent
length (i.e. from the tip of the snout to the end of the cloaca) of
4.24 ± 0.03 cm (N º 96). An oxygen diffuser was placed in each
aquarium to maintain a high oxygenation of water (mean ± -
SE º 9.70 ± 0.05 mg/litre). The ambient air temperature was
regulated to maintain water temperature at an average of 14.7 C
(SE º 0.05 C). We established a photoperiod of 13:11 h light:dark
(Lumilux de lux 2350 lm daylight tube, L36W/12e950 and Sylvania
Professional tube, 36 W DECOR183). In all aquaria, a
terrestrial habitat was composed of a 23  46 cm floating ëTurtle
Dockí (Zoo Med Laboratories Inc., San Luis Obispo, CA, U.S.A.)
covered by natural moss taken at the capture location (watered
daily to maintain the humidity at an average of 84.75%,
SE º 0.05%) and containing a shelter (14  11 cm and 6 cm high).
In 12 of the 24 aquaria, we placed one large aquatic shelter
(20  60 cm) closed by a grid to avoid fish entering. In every
aquarium, we also put two supports for egg laying (strips of filter
papers). In the aquarium providing an aquatic shelter, one support
was placed under the shelter. Newts were fed with 50 mg of
Chironomus larvae per newt every day in the afternoon. This food
is a typical newt prey and the quantity given was ad libitum,
corresponding to the newts' needs. Food was provided on the dock
and in the water under a grid to avoid consumption by fish (the
grid was removed at the end of the day when all the food was
consumed).
We obtained the goldfish from the Aquarium of Liege and stored
them in a large tank (180  80 cm, 60 cm water depth) in our laboratory.
They had never been in contact with amphibians prior to
the experiment and they were all healthy. They had a mean ± SE standard length (i.e. from the tip of the snout to the posterior end of
the last vertebra) of 11.4 ± 0.18 cm (N º 12). We placed the fish at
the same time as the newts in 12 of the 24 experimental newt tanks
as described above; the conditions applied to the fish were similar
to those applied to the newts. Goldfish and newts were in direct
contact, but the fish could not get into the aquatic shelter. Similar to
the newts, goldfish were fed with Chironomus larvae (500 mg per
fish every day).
Experimental Procedure
We used four experimental treatments (N º 6 aquaria and
N º 24 newts for each treatment): control (no fish) with an aquatic
shelter, control without aquatic shelter, fish with aquatic shelter
and fish without aquatic shelter (Fig. 2). The experiment lasted 8
weeks (17 Marche25 May 2014), i.e. the duration of the aquatic and
reproductive period.
By using sketches of unique features of the newts, we were able
to visually recognize each of the four individuals from each
aquarium (Winandy & DenoÄel, 2011). To assess the use of the
terrestrial habitat by newts, we used a scan sampling (Martin &
Bateson, 2007) method twice a day (morning and afternoon), 5
days a week. Therefore, we obtained the proportion of terrestrial
habitat use of each newt based on 10 repeated measures every
week during the 8 weeks (i.e. 7680 observations of presence/
absence in each habitat). To assess sexual activity, we used a focal
sampling (Martin & Bateson, 2007) method on the four newts of
each aquarium for 3 min. We repeated the focal sampling measure
twice a day (morning and afternoon), 5 days a week (during the 8
weeks) to obtain the number of courtship events for each newt per
week (i.e. 7680 observations of occurrence of sexual activity). To
assess reproductive success, we counted the eggs in each aquarium
every week (i.e. 192 records). We changed the egg supports every
day, placing them in independent tanks to avoid predation risk.
Statistical Analyses
We used a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) to test the
effects of three variables as fixed effects: fish (presence versus
absence), aquatic shelter (presence versus absence) and week
(ordinal variable; 1e8 weeks), and interactions between these
variables, on (1) the proportion of terrestrial habitat use (using
binomial error distribution), (2) the number of sexual activity
events (using a Poisson error distribution) and (3) the number of
eggs (using a Poisson error distribution). We assessed significance
using likelihood-ratio tests (ANOVA of the model with a particular
explanatory variable versus the model without that variable). In
analyses of terrestrial habitat use and sexual activity, aquaria and
individuals were included as random factors (individuals nested
within aquaria). In the analyses of eggs, we included aquaria as a
random factor. We also included, as a covariate, the number of
newts present in the water for the analyses on sexual activity and
the number of females present in water for the analyses on eggs.
Finally, to assess the gradient of responses between the four
treatments on terrestrial habitat use and reproduction, we used a
Tukey contrast test. We chose an a priori level of significance of 0.05. Analyses were performed in R 3.0.2 (www.r-project.org) using
lme4 and multcomp packages.
Ethical Note
The aim of this study was to determine only the potential
nonconsumptive effects of goldfish on adult newts by observing
their behaviour. Consequently, care was taken to plan the experiment
accordingly and, thus, to avoid any newts being harmed.
Moreover, newts had the opportunity to hide in protected areas
from fish; a large terrestrial shelter was available all the time so
newts could avoid any direct contact with fish. This study mimics
natural conditions in wild and garden ponds where goldfish are
introduced and coexist with newts (DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2014). No
alternative design would have been suitable since a direct interaction
between fish and newts is the key to understanding newt
avoidance and the only situation present in the wild (Winandy &
DenoÄel, 2013b). Therefore, goldfish were able to touch newts and
could try to ëpeckí them. However, given gape size limitations of fish
in comparison with newt size, fish could not catch or wound them.
However, the direct contact may frighten the newts. The study was
carried out in an accredited laboratory of the University of Liege
(LA1610429), and the research project was accepted by the university's
ethics commission (Protocol No. 1246). The collecting
permit was issued by the Service Public de Wallonie (SPW),
following approval by the Conseil Superieur Wallon de la Conservation
de la Nature. In the laboratory, all individuals were checked
and fed every day. At the end of the experiment, newts were
released alive and unharmed into their capture habitat following
the recommendations of the capture permit. All materials used for
capture and maintenance were well washed and disinfected before
and after use following the recommendations of the study permit.


xresults


Terrestrial Habitat Use
The GLMM analysis of the proportion of terrestrial habitat use
(Table 1) indicated a significant effect of fish: in the presence of fish,
more newts left thewater than in the control treatment (mean ± SE
of 0.16 ± 0.01 and 0.67 ± 0.02 newts on land per aquarium for
control and fish treatments, respectively). There was also a significant
effect of the presence of an aquatic shelter: when a shelter
was available in the water, fewer newts left the water than when it
was absent (0.28 ± 0.02 and 0.55 ± 0.02 newts on land per aquarium
for the treatments with and without aquatic shelter, respectively).
Finally, there was a significant effect of week indicating an
increase in terrestrial habitat use with time. Tukey contrast tests
showed a significant gradient of response between the four
experimental treatments (Fig. 3a). There was also a significant
interaction between fish, aquatic habitat and week (Fig. 4).
Sexual Activity (Courtship)
The GLMM analysis on sexual activity (Table 1) indicated a significant
effect of fish, i.e. less sexual activity in the presence than in
the absence of fish (mean ± SE of 0.91 ± 0.06 and 0.24 ± 0.04
courtship events per newt and per week for control and fish
treatments, respectively). There was also a significant effect of the
presence of the aquatic shelter: there were more courtship displays
exhibited when an aquatic shelter was available than when it was
not (0.86 ± 0.06 and 0.29 ± 0.04 courtship events per newt and per
week for the treatments with and without aquatic shelter,
respectively). Finally, there was a significant effect of week, indicating
a decrease in the number of courtship events with time.
Tukey contrast tests showed a significant gradient of response between
the four experimental treatments (Fig. 3b). The presence of
newts in water (included as a covariate in the model) had a significant
effect on sexual activity, as it affected positively the number
of courtship events (c21
º 76.38, P < 0.001).
Production of Eggs
The GLMM analysis on egg production (Table 1) showed a significant
effect of fish, with a total of 2475 eggs in control aquaria and
297 eggs in aquaria with fish (mean ± SE of 25.8 ± 2.6 and 3.1 ± 0.7
eggs per week and per aquarium for the control and fish treatments,
respectively). There was also a significant effect of week, showing a decrease in the number of eggs with time, and a significant interaction
between week and fish, showing a very low production of
eggs over time for the fish treatment, and a decrease in egg production
with time for the control treatment. There were also significant
interactions between aquatic habitat and week, and
between fish, aquatic habitat and week (i.e. a more pronounced
decrease in the numberof eggs in the control without aquatic shelter
than in the control with aquatic shelter). Tukey contrast tests
showed a significant difference between both the fish groups and
the control groups (Fig. 3c). The presence of females in the water
(included as a covariate in the model) was significant and affected
positively the production of eggs (c21
º 73.28, P < 0.001). Indeed,
females were seen inwater 2.5 times more often in the absence than
in the presence of fish (mean ± SE of 84 ± 1.6% and 33 ± 3.4% of
water residency, respectively). Taking into account the presence of
females in the water, there were still 3.3 times fewer eggs laid by
aquatic females in the presence of fish than in the absence of fish.


xdiscussion

The results presented in this behavioural study highlight an
important cause of the rarity of coexistence patterns observed
between fish and pond-breeding amphibians in the wild
(Bucciarelli, Blaustein, Garcia, & Kats, 2014; DenoÄel & Ficetola,
2014). In unfavourable aquatic habitats, i.e. in the presence of fish
in our design, newts chose to leave their aquatic habitat for
terrestrial life (Fig.1) and, therefore, give up reproduction. When an
aquatic shelter was available, more newts stayed in the water and
displayed courtship; however, despite this choice, their reproductive
success was very low. By exploring these nonconsumptive
behavioural effects, this study contributes to the understanding of
the complex patterns of newt distribution in fish and fishless
habitats, but also of the consequences of fish introduction on
amphibian diversity.
Impact of Fish Presence on Habitat Use in Newts
Both biotic and abiotic conditions influence the occurrence of
amphibians in their breeding habitat (Indermaur et al., 2010; Van
Buskirk, 2005). Indeed, newt distribution can be explained by the
quality of their habitat such as deep and fishless ponds (DenoÄel &
Ficetola, 2008). When these conditions deteriorate, newts are no
longer found or are present in lower population densities (DenoÄel
et al., 2005; DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2014). By showing that newts can
avoid contact with fish by leaving the aquatic habitat, our results
provide a new empirical explanation in support of such field observations
(Langerhans, 2007). This habitat shift is in agreement
with models on complex life cycles that predict life on land when
the aquatic habitat provides poor aquatic conditions (Werner,1986;
Whiteman, 1994; Wilbur & Collins, 1973). When not leaving for the
entirety of the breeding season, this allows for a reduction in the
contact time with fish.
The escape of newts to terrestrial shelters highlights that these
habitats are essential to newts, not only for aestivation or overwintering
(DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2008), but also for the whole year in
providing a safe place when aquatic habitats become less hospitable.
Indeed, newt survival has been shown to be higher on land
than in the water in another newt species (Unglaub, Steinfartz,
Drechsler, & Schmidt, 2015). Previous studies showed the importance
of the forest in the core zone around the breeding ponds of
amphibians including newts (DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2008; Gustafson,
Malmgren, & Mikusinski, 2011; Indermaur & Schmidt, 2011).
Indeed, forests can contain moist and shaded ground, which is
favourable for feeding, but also for migration, aestivating and overwintering (Jehle & Arntzen, 2000; Marty, Angelibert, Giani, &
Joly, 2005; Schabetsberger, Jehle, Maletzky, Pesta, & Sztatecsny,
2004). The consideration of the effects of fish should, thus, focus
not only on the aquatic environment, but also on its terrestrial
surroundings (Ficetola, 2015). The presence of a favourable terrestrial
habitat near a breeding pond invaded by goldfish could allow
multiple movements of newts between aquatic and terrestrial
habitats, therefore limiting the contact with fish while keeping the
opportunity to reproduce.
Along with the terrestrial habitat, aquatic microhabitats are
essential environmental features to sustain newt populations. Field
ecological studies have shown that amphibians, such as newts, are
present in ponds with plentiful vegetation, which provides shelter
for both adults and larvae, and substrate for spawning (Hartel et al.,
2007; Joly, Miaud, Lehmann, & Grolet, 2001; Landi, Piazzini, &
Saveri, 2014). In this study, we found that the availability of
aquatic shelter allows half of the newt population (53%) to coexist
with fish, whereas almost all newts (87%) left the water when they
had no aquatic shelter. The use of aquatic shelters is the most
frequently described avoidance strategy in response to fish introduction
in the natural environment (Hartman & Lawler, 2014;
Petranka, Kats, & Sih, 1987). However, the presence of the aquatic
microhabitat is also important regardless of fish presence: in an
aquatic habitat that provided shelter and was devoid of fish, most
newts (92%) stayed in the water for the entire experiment (8
weeks), while, in the absence of an aquatic shelter, they started to
leave the water after only 4 weeks. This concurs with a previous
study showing that, when the aquatic environmental conditions
were unfavourable (too high a density), newts began the migration
to the terrestrial habitat sooner (Grayson & Wilbur, 2009). Our
results support the hypothesis of newt selectivity based on the
quality of their aquatic habitat (DenoÄel & Lehmann, 2006). They
show that microhabitat availability can allow the persistence of
populations in both fish and fishless habitats (see also Winandy &
DenoÄel, 2013b). Indeed, the increase in aquatic vegetation could
reduce the impact of introduced predators and competitors on
native species (Kiesecker, Blaustein, & Miller, 2001; Pearl, Adams,
Leuthold, & Bury, 2005). However, in the natural environment,
goldfish introduction often leads to a reduction in vegetation that
could provide shelter (Richardson, Whoriskey, & Roy, 1995). Safe
habitats in the water can, therefore, be a limited resource, making
the coexistence between fish and amphibians difficult.
Impact of Fish Presence and Habitat on Newt Reproduction
Antipredator behaviour has been shown to imply a reduction in
the time spent on essential activities such as reproduction (Lima &
Dill, 1990; Strauss, Lau, & Carroll, 2006). Although such a trade-off
between breeding and predation risk can be adaptive (Rohr &
Madison, 2001), skipping reproduction entirely is certainly not. In
the presence of fish, newts maintained some reproduction (see also
Winandy & DenoÄel, 2013b), but the production of eggs was very
limited and not compensated by density effects (i.e. by aquatic
newts that could have deposited more eggs in the absence of
competitors). Indeed, there were eight times fewer eggs deposited
in fish environments than in favourable fishless habitats. Therefore,
the presence of aquatic shelters made the persistence of sexual
activity possible, but poorly improved the egg deposition rate.
Although goldfish can be predators of eggs and salamander larvae
(Monello &Wright, 2001), in this study, females were able to wrap
their eggs, and therefore, protect them against predation (Miaud,
1993; Orizaola & Bra~na, 2003a). In our study, eggs were removed
from the aquaria every day; thus consumption by fish was unlikely
and indeed not observed. Moreover, in aquaria with aquatic shelter,
newts could lay eggs under the shelter. Therefore, the difference in
the number of eggs between the control and fish treatments was
not due to predation, but was partly because females left the water.
By fleeing the aquatic habitat in response to the presence of fish,
newts forgo reproductive opportunities.
When an aquatic shelter was available and newts stayed in the
water, this low reproductive success could be explained by both a
reduction in sexual activity and females deciding not to lay eggs.
This confirms that, in the natural environment, the absence of eggs
and larvae may indicate not only a high predatory pressure, but also
a decrease in reproductive effort (Ficetola et al., 2011). Therefore, in
the wild, the measure of reproductive success may allow a more
accurate assessment of the impact of introduced predators than the
mere presence of adults (Ficetola et al., 2011). Oviposition habitat
selection has been largely studied in pond-breeding insects such as
mosquitos, beetles and midges (Binckley & Resetarits, 2005;
Blaustein et al., 2004; Brodin, Johansson, & Bergsten, 2006) and
in amphibians, particularly in anurans (Egan & Paton, 2004; Schulte
et al., 2011). In these taxa, females choose to breed more in sites
without predators than in ponds with a high risk of predation for
their offspring. Therefore, the escape from water in the presence of
fish could be interpreted as dispersal away from fish to potentially
more suitable ponds. However, in our study, females did not have a
choice to breed in a habitat devoid of fish; nevertheless, they
decided not to lay eggs in the presence of fish. An explanation for
this forgoing of reproduction could be that the behavioural
response is not based on an assessment of the different breeding
possibilities in order to maximize reproductive success. Indeed, it
has been shown in mosquitos that females do not adjust their decisions
to the heterogeneity in habitat quality. In contrast, they
responded to the absolute value of a potential oviposition site, and
not to the relative value in comparison with other sites (Kiflawi,
Blaustein, & Mangel, 2003). Therefore, the ability of females to
assess habitat quality for offspring can strongly influence reproductive
success (Rieger et al., 2004): in a positive way when multiple
breeding sites are available at a low interpond distance, but in
a negative way when the breeding site assessed as unsuitable by
females is isolated from other ponds. Unfortunately, current
anthropogenic pressure, such as the destruction and fragmentation
of habitats, leads more to the isolation of breeding and terrestrial
habitats (Da Silva & Rossa-Feres, 2011; DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2008;
Greenwald, Gibbs, & Waite, 2009). Indeed, the lack of landscape
connectivity between suitable aquatic and terrestrial habitat constrains
many amphibian species with aquatic reproduction to undertake
risky migration in a more disturbed environment, which
could probably contribute to population decline (Becker, Fonseca,
Haddad, Batista, & Prado, 2007). Moreover, compared with flying
pond-breeding insects, semiaquatic amphibians, such as newts,
have more limited dispersal capability (Ficetola & De Bernardi,
2004), making migration to alternative aquatic habitats possibly
more problematic. In landscapes in which ponds are isolated,
although a high emigration of newts was found in fish ponds, few
movements were observed between distant fish and fishless ponds
(Unglaub et al., 2015). However, as long as newts still occur in fish
ponds (even without reproductive success) or in nearby habitats, as
it is often the case (see e.g., DenoÄel, Scime, & Zambelli, in press),
there is potential for their conservation. In particular, if management
provides new adequate aquatic sites near the invaded ponds
(Manenti, Bonelli, Scaccini, Binda, & Zugnoni, 2014) or if fish
disappear naturally (e.g., after pond drying) or by removal
(Vredenburg, 2004), there is hope for the persistence of newts and
for an increase in their population.
The long-term consequences of skipping reproduction may be
difficult to assess because amphibians can make strategic decisions
over their lifetime about whether to breed or not to breed. For
instance, amphibians may benefit from skipping reproduction by reducing the number of eggs laid in a breeding season, then saving
energy, allowing for a higher reproductive value the subsequent
year (Reyer, Frei, & Som, 1999). Indeed, reproduction in amphibians
may incur a high energy cost that can lead to the decision to skip a
breeding opportunity and attempt reproduction in years that present
suitable environmental conditions for both adults and
offspring (Cayuela et al., 2014; Church, Bailey, Wilbur, Kendall, &
Hines, 2007). Therefore, the decision of an organism to reproduce
depends on environmental conditions that directly affect individual
fitness and the probability of offspring survival (McNamara &
Houston, 1996). However, in the case of fish introduction, the
poor environmental quality repeatedly affects a population over
more than one year; both the decision to skip reproduction and the
impossibility to find another breeding habitat may lead to the
extinction of the population.
In conclusion, escape from fish habitats by pond-breeding amphibians
is a mechanism that contributes to explaining the negative
spatial association observed in the field between introduced fish
and amphibians (DenoÄel & Ficetola, 2014; Orizaola & Bra~na, 2006;
Pilliod et al., 2010). Fish species, such as goldfish, that have been
shown to be problematic for the larval stage of amphibians through
consumptive effects (Monello & Wright, 2001) are, thus, also
detrimental for the adult stage of amphibians through nonconsumptive
effects, i.e. by behavioural avoidance. Habitat selection
has a direct functional relationship with survival and reproduction
and, therefore, strongly influences fitness (Morris, 2011). In this
study, the consequences were particularly acute, as the escape
response implied a complete habitat shift for a large part of a
population, with the fitness consequence of forgoing reproduction.
More broadly, these results also showthe importance of integrating
behavioural patterns and habitat heterogeneity in conservation
biology studies (Caro, 2007).