xabstract
Phragmites australis (common reed) has been increasing in brackish tidal wetlands of the eastern United
States coast over the last century. Whereas several researchers have documented changes in community strueture~ dlls
research explores the effect~ of Phragmltea expansion on aboveground biomass and soll properties. We used historical
aerial photography and a global positioning system (GPS) to identify and age Phragmites patches within a high marsh
dominated by shortgrasses (Spartltta patella and Diachl plcata). Plots along transects were estaMished widiln the vegetation
types to represent a gradient of species dominance and a variety of ages of the Phragmites plots. In comparison
to neighboring shortgrass ~ communities, Phragmites communities were found to have nearly 10 times the live aboveground
biomass. They also had lower soil salinity at the surface, a lower water level, less pronounced microtopographie relief~
and higher redox potentials. These soil factors were correlated with the age and biomass of Phragmites communitie%
were increasingly different with increasing Phragmites dominance along the transects, and were increasingly Mrered by
the ages of Phragmites communities ~ntil the factors stabilized in plots of S yr to 15 yr of age. We propose that Phragmites
expansion plays an important ~ole in Mterlng dlese soll properties and suggest a variety- of mechanisms to explain these
aberations.

xintroduction
Phragmites australis (Car) Trin ex Steud (common
reed) is currently expanding its cover within
many tid01 marshes of the eastern United States
(Marks et al. 1993) Though it is recognized as a
cosmopolitan species and may be the most widely
distributed flowering plant in the world, individual
occurrences in tidal marshes have historically been
locally restricted to a narrow belt at the marsh-upland
interidce (Niering et a l 1077; Niering and
VCamen 1980). The dramatic spread of Phragmites
into lower marsh areas appears to be unprecedealed
in the vegetation history of coastal marshes
( orson et al. 1987).
'The vegetation structure of brackish tidal marsh
is altered severely when tall, dense, monotypic
stands of Phragmites reeds replace ielatively diverse
shortgrass communities. Waterfowl usage is reduced
substantially (Roman et at. 1984), and several
rare and endangered plant populations are
threatened (see Marks et al. 199,3). Few studies
have addressed how the invasion of Phragvnites may
affect soil properties It is well known that wetland
macrophytes can strongly influence marsh soil
properties through their physiology and morphology.
Dacey and Howes (1984) demonstrated an increase
m the rates of plant transpiration and soil
oxidation under the higher biomass of tall form
.spartina alterniflora relative to the short form Berthess
and Hacker (1994) demonstrated an increase
in shading and a decrease in salmDy when Juncus
gerard~i is present in an Iue [ructecens community.
Plants can alter soil structure through litter buildup
and through hummock formation, which can
alter the flooding regime and the rates of nutrient
renewal and soil storage (Bowden 1987) Differences
in gas transport ~ystems can also alte~ soil
reduction-oxidation potentials (redox potentials;
Jaynes and Carpenter 1986; Wigand et ah 1997),
and plant osmoregulatory mechanisms can have
feedbacks on the soil saliniw (D'Antonio and Mshall
1991; Ungar 1991)
Considering size and physiological differences
between Phfagmites and common high marsh shortgrasses
( spartina patens, Distichtis @icata, and juncus
gerardii), we hypothesized that the invasive Phragmites community would alter sea~eral marsh soil
properties relative to the extant shortgrass communib-.
We examined the extent to which the replacement
of a shortgrass community (dominated
by S. patens and D. spicata) with a Phragrmtes-dominant
communi,ty is associated with soil salinity,
marsh water levels, redox potentials, soil microtopography,
and peak aboveground biomass in a
brackish tidal marsh of the Mullica River, New Jersey.
We first determined the extent to which these
f,~ctors vary between Phm~te~ communities and
neighboring, uninvaded shortgr~s communities
Second, we analyzed the extent to which the relative
dominance, age, and aboveground biomass of
Ph~-agraites communities are correlated with the
measured variables. We used the test of association
with age to infer causality

xmethods
This study was conducted within the brackish tidal
marshes of Hog Island in the Jacques Cousteau
Nationai Estuarine Research Reserve at Mullica
River-Great Bay in southern New jersey (Fig. 1 )
The brackish region (0.5-18%o) of the Mullica River
centers on Hog Island, approximately 17 km upstream
i}om the mouth of the river at Great Bay-.
Sites were chosen only- on the larger portion of the
island, which is nearly 600 m s in area and approximately
~00 m fiom the shore on either side
Hog Island is a site of minimal human impact.
Historical human uses include muskrat trapping
and duck hunting. The watershed of the Mullica
River is contained within the Pinelands National
Reserve (commissioned in 1980); the Reserve sets
strict landuse and development restrictions, leading
to high water quali~ y and minimal hydrologic
manipu[ations. In the mid 1970s, Ferren et al.
(1981) mapped the distribution of vegetation communities
on Hog Island (Fig. 2) At that time, Hog
Island contained plant species representative of
three salinity classes, with freshwater species at the
upriver end, brackish species in the middle, and
saltwater species at the downriver end. "While the
entire island was considered brackish marsh, following
Cowardin et aL (1979), Fel~en et a l (1981)
demonstrated a range of substrate salmities of 2-
B%o at the oligohalme uprivei end and 4-7%0 at
the downriver end. By 1993, Phragmites had completely
replaced the mixed vascular and Pdtc~zdra
virg.irdcc~dominated communities, located in the
middle and upriver sections of the island, respectively.
Today, distinct Phragmites patches, of vat ying
ages and rates of expansion, are found only within
in the matrix of the shortgrass 3'. pc~tens-I). @~catc~
commumty- in the downriver portion of Hog Island
(Fig. S inset) The scattered pattern of Ph,rag~ites
invasion within the shortgra~ss community- on Hog
Island is not explicitly related to tidal creek distribution
or flooding rates according to spatial analysis
of aerial photography and a detailed site map
(Ferren et al. 1981) Because the sites of the t;h~ag
r~{tes communities are known to have been shortgrass
sites less than 25 yr prior (Ferren et al. 1981),
these Pt~,-r~gmites patches give an opportuni/f to assess
associations between  plant and soil properties
across a gradient of ages and relative Phragmites
dominance
The historical sequence of vegetation patteIns
on the island was determined using a series of high
resolution (1:12,000-1:$5,000) aerial photographs
(19S2-1991). A fine-scale map of the vegetation
communities c. 1977 (Ferren et al, 1981; Fig. 2)
provided, a field-tested base map of habitat and
dominance types with which to compare current
observations and interpretations of aerial photography.
Phragmites was first documented on Elog Island
in the 1971 photographs To establish the ages of
Phfagm~tes communities on Hog Island, color inhared
photographs horn the growing season--dated
1971, 1977, :[979, 1986, and 1991--were interpre/-
ed with a stereoscope These vegetation distributions
were mapped and digitized into a GRASS 60
(Geographic Resources Analysis Support System)
geographic information ~ystem (G[S) and then imported
into an Arc/Into GIS. A multi-year overlay
of these Phf-agm~tes patches was used to determine
concentric bands of increasing age. \ ~ used these
spatial age bands to classify plots within Ph~agfmtes
patches
The southeHl portion of the island, dominated
by shortgrasses, contains many discreet Phfag'vdtes
patches of varying age, orientation, and area. Nine
transects across the two vegetation ~-pes were located
on our age-based maps, according to the species
compositions and age of Phragmites populations
(Fig. g). After the suitabilib~ of these nine
transects were field-verified, the transects were
staked for futme data collection A hand-held global
positioning ~ystem (GPS) was used to assure the
accuracy of the transect locations to within 5 m
Each transect was roughly 12 m long and comprised
six 0.25-m ~ samplmg plots Using a nested
box plot design in early- summer 1993, we had
found that the variance between plots peaked at
this sample plot size fbi all of the soil variables
measured in this stu@ The transects were laid
across the boundary of a Phrag~ites community
and a shortgrass communib~, with each of the six
plots positioned relative to the community- intersection
(Fig. g). The most outward of the flowering
shoots of Phrc*g~ites was used as the border of the
Phfc~gmit~s patch, and thus, the center of the plant
community intersection Plots C and D, those representing
the community intersection, or ecotone,
were staked along the transect approximately 0.5
m apart on either side of the ~arthest flowering
shoot The Phragmites plots, E and F, were positioned
within predetermined age classes, spatially
represented as concentric bands fiom the digitized
communilT/ maps. The shortgrass plots, A and B,
were positioned at intervals of 2-g m fiom plot C.
Therefore, at one end of each transect, two of the
six plots, A arid B, were within a shortgrass community.
At the other end, two plots, E and F, lepresented
the Phra~it*t~ community The iemaining
two plots, C and D, lay in the middle of each transect,
within the mixed zone of both communities
Data were collected in August 199.g and 1994,
the biomass peak for both shoitgrass and Phragmites communities. To minimize the effects of tidal
conditions, measurements of aboveground live biomass,
soil salinib~, marsh water levels, and microtopoglaphy
were made at low tide within a 1-h interval
in each of the six plots along the transect
Redox potentials were measured at both low and
high tide
To reduce destructive harvesting, aboveground
live biomass was calculated with allometric relationships
we had constructed previously for the two
plant communities (Wind.ham 1995). The ratio of
live : dead stems in Phrc~gmites plots was negatively
correlated with dry weight aboveg~ound biomass
(r ~ 085; p < 0 001). The percent of plot area
flee of' hummocks (hereafter, hollow) was negatively
correlated with dry weight alooveground biomass
for shortgrass communities (r ~ 086; p <
0.001). Aboveground biomass in the mixed vegetation
plots was calculated as the shortgrass biomass
(using the percent hummock regression
equation) plus the Phragmites biomass (using a
height regression equation for each individual
culm, W[ndham 1995).
Porewater from a fi-esh soil sample (approximately
50 g wet) was used to determine soil salinity.
The water was expressed from the soil through filter
paper into a vial and the expelled water tested
with a Reichert:Jung T/C mete~ refiactometer-salinometer
within 4 h of' collection (F~asco 1980).
The water level of the marsh was measured (to the
nearest centimeter) at low tide A S-cm diam core
was taken at the lowest point of the plot's soil surface
and a metric ruler inserted in the resulting
hole down to the level surface of water.
Microtopography was classified by measurement
of the maximum soil relief within a plot, We used
a metric ruler and a straight edge to calculate the
mmximum vertical distance fiom the highest surface
point to the lowest surface point within a p l o t
Bulk oxidation-reduction potentials were measured
in each plot at both high and low tide using
a field-portable waterproof pH/Eh meter (Hanna
instruments 9g05C) connected to a platinum
probe (Hanna Instruments ~g2~q0) t ~ removed
soil cores (25 cm diam) of 5 cm and 10 cm depth
near the center of each plot and inserted the platinum
probe rata each hole to measure the redox
potential at each depth In the shortgrass plots, 5-
cm depth measurements were made in both hummock
and hollow areas to account for the rnicrotopographic
differences. To reduce the effects of
temporal (tidal) variation, all redox measuremeLlts
were taken within a g0-min span at each tidal extreme
We analyzed data for five variables (sa[iniVy, biomass,
water level, microtopography, and redox potential
at two depths at high and low tide). To account
for site-specific differences between the iep-
[icate tiansects, the soil variables (salini/y, water level,
microtopography, and redox potential) were
analyzed as measures of relative difference (the values
were standardized to center around a mean of
0 for each transect) Relative difference was calculated
toy subtracting the mean value for the enti~
e transect fiom each value along the transect.
Differences between the two communities wete
determined by taking an average value for each
variable in the Heragmites-dominated plots (E and
F) arid comparing it to an average calculated for
the shortgrass plots (A and B ) The use of a mean
value for communities was validated by- a 2 X 2
comparison of A to B and E to K using pairwise ttests.
For each variable, the shortgrass plots, A and
B, and the Phragmites plots, E and F, were neve*
found to be significantly different within communities.
Having normal distributions (G-test, Abacus
Concepts 1996), both the raw and the standardized
(relative difference) values were cornpa*ed using a
MANO\!& (multivariate analysis of variance; Statistical
Analysis System 1995) to test for differences
between the two communities 'The data are summarized
in Table 1
We used analyses of variance (Abacus Concepts
1996) to determine the relationship between each
edaphic factor and plot or species covet (shortglass,
mixed, or Phragmites) and age of Phragr~ites
plots We use a Bonfer~oni-Dunn technique to
specify differences between the treatments. We also
used coi*elation analyses (Abacus Concepts 1996)
to examine the association of Phragmites age and
biomass with soil factors We propose that soil factors
correlated with the age or with the biomass of
Phragmites communities are likely to have been influenced
by Phrag'mites We propose that differences
in biornass and soil properties with age (0-22
yr) and levels of Phragr~ites dominance (0-100%)
designate categories at which soil pioperties aie
significantly altered. We assume that the longe* a
species has beea present and the larger its proportion of' the biomass, the moie of' an effect that
species has had on soil properties (Osgood and
Zieman 1993)


xresults
Biomass and soil characteristics of Phragmites
plots were found to be significantly different than
in shortgrass plots, based on the five variables measured
(MANOVA, p < 0.0001; Wilks' lambda
0.00889). By accounting for all the measured variables,
this test demonstrates that Phragmites and
shortgrass communities occupy highly dissimilar
soils. One-way ANOVAs on both the raw and standardized
data (relative difference) show that each
of the measured characteristics differ between
Phragmites plots and the shortgrass plots (Table 1).
Aboveground biomass of" Phragmites was nearly
10 times the biomass of shortgrass plots (1,868 -
189.34 g m ~ versus 199.02 ~ 37.97 g m ~). Interstitial
water salinity was c. 2%o less in Phrrl~itea
plots than in the shortgrass plots (6%o versus
8%o). Marsh water levels at low tide averaged 4 cm
below the soil m the Phragmites plots and 4 cm
above m the shortgrass plots. Shortgrass plots had
over 8 cm rnicrotopographic relief', whereas the
soil surface was relatively flat in Phragmites plots,
averaging less than 1 cm relief'.
At high tide, reduction-oxidation potentials in
Phrctg'mitea plots were 175-200 mV higher than in
neighboring shortgrass plots. At low tide, Phragrvi
te.s redox potentials were still higher than shortgrass
redox potentials, but the difference between
the communities was narrower (75-100 mV). This
narroudng of" the difference between the communities
came mostly fiorn a significant increase within
the shortgrass community, whose average redox
potential increased nearly 100 mV from high to
low tide (p < 0.0014) I'hese tidally-influenced
temporal differences in redox potential accompanied
strong spatial differences between the hummock
and hollow topography of' the shortgrass
community (7667 versus 166.9 at high tide,
hummock versus hollow). Within plot differences
in redox potential were not significant for Phrc~g
mites communities, although there were significant
differences in shoi tgrass communities at high tide
between hummock and hollow sites (p = 0 0156),
demonstrating the potential importance of microtopography
Despite known differences in root
structure, no significant differences were found
with depth ( 5 cm and 10 cm) either within or
between the communities.
Soil properties were highly intercorrelated withm
the Phragmites communities (Table 2 ) Notably,
soil properties were correlated with biomass in
plots with Phragmites present (C, D, E, arid F), and
both biomass and soil properties were correlated
with the ages of Phragmites plots. Salinily, water level,
and maximum micro topographic relief weie all
negatively correlated with plot age and biomass.
Whereas redox potential measured at low tide was
too variable to show a correlation with age or biomass,
at high tide redox potential was positively
correlated with both factors
The five variables also showed distinct patterns
of change along the transect gradient of' species
cover (tiansect plots) and along an age g r a d i e n t
Figure 4 depicts how the five variables along the
transect gradient vary as Phrag~ites cover increases.
Figure 5 shows how biomass and soil properties
vary with age classes of Phr~ites expansion
Whereas d e a r differences were found between
the ends of the transect (pure shortgrass plots and
pure Phragmites plots ) , we found different patterns of change along
the transect with the increasing
presence of Phragmites. biomass increased with the presence of mature, 
flowering culms (D plots) but did not peak until the plots were dominated 
by Phragmites (100%% cover plots e and f, fig 4). water levels and microtop relief
followed the same pattern across the transect; a small decrewase with the presence 
of mature culms adn a further decrease with 100% Phragmites cover.
salinity also dereased witht he presence of mature culms of Phragmites. in contrast, redox 
potentials did not show increases until the plots were dominated by Phragmites (100% cover, plots f and r).
edaphic differences between the two communities developed over a relatively short 
period. Aboveground biomass significant rose and peaked at 8 ye of age, showing no rise with increasing 
age of the plots. The decrease in salinity and increase
in redox potentials of Phrag~ites plots also
diverged ~}oin the shortgrass plots and stabilized
at 8 vr of a g e %*r level and microtopographic
relief both showed small decreases in g=yr-old plots,
but the lowest levels were reached at older ages
Water le:eels hit their lowest levels in 15-yr-old plots
and stabilized at this level as age increased, whereas
microtopographic relief stabilized at low levels
by the 8th year of Phrag'mites presence

xdiscussion
Soil under Ph*agmites cover is strikingly different
fi-om addacent soil unde~ shortgrass communities
Further, the age and bioma~ss of Ph~-agmites communities
are significantly correlated v~dth redox potentials
at high tide, salinity,, water levels, and maximum
ielief. These data indicate that an invasion
of Phragmites into shortgrass communities alters the
physical conditions of brackish tidal marshes.
The differences in soil and biomass between
Phmgmitea and shortgrass communities may be influenced
by- morphologica[ and physiological differences
between the species The most apparent
difference is that Ph,-agmites stands of the Mullica
River have nearly 10 times the aboveground live
bioma~ss than do shortgrass stands The rapid and
dense growth of Phrccgrnites is supported by- large
carbohydrate stores in underground rhizomes or
rhizomatous connections to established stands of
Phragmites.
The strong correlations between aboveground
biomass and several of the soil properties may result
from several %edbacks on soil properties.
Greater amounts of abovegro und biomass in Phragmites
 may influence the rise in redox potentials and
lowering of wate~ levels (Howes et al. 1981) Increased
leaf area and litter build-up may shade
soils, reducing evaporation and ieducing salinities
(Bertness and Hacker 1994) Increased litter production
may also fill hollows in the soil surface,
thereby raising the soil le~eel above the water table
and also smoothing the surface microtopography.
Differences in gas transport systems in each corr~-
munily may- explain the differences in redox potential
and bioma~ss. Phmgmites is the only salt
marsh grass that has been demonstrated to use a
Venturi-enhanced convective throughflow of gases
to provide oxygen to its roots and to remove accumulated
toxic gases (e.g., H2S, Armstrong and
Armstrong 1991). Compared with such shortgrasses
as @aftincc patens and DisticMis @icata, which depend
on radial diffusion of oxygen fiom their
roots, Phfagmites may be more efficient at aerating
its rhizosphere, both in magnitude and in depth
of aeration.
The difference m interstitial saiini  between the
two communities may be influenced toy different
methods of osmoregulation @c~rtina patens uses
glands to expel excess salts, while Phragrnites incorporates
sahs through ion accumulation and builds
osmotic regulatory pressure in its thizomes (UnBar
1991) By sequestering sahs in its belowground tissues,
Phragmites may be able to reduce the surface
soil salinities of brackish tidal marshes, thereby
maintaining a higher capacib" for ammonium adsorption
in the soil (Rysgaard et al. 1999) le~,~ereas
all of the salinities measured (range 2-11%o) weie
within the range of Phragmites tolerance, the higher
salinities of the shortgrass communities probably
do not prohibit Phrccgrnites expansion, which appears
to be continuing.
Suong differences between Ph*agmites-dominant
and S. patens-dominant communities in soil microtopography
and redox potentials may be a resuh
of the highly dissimilar root morphologies. Phrccg
mites communities may9 show low soil mic~otopography
and low spatial variation in redox potentials
due to their sod-building root structure of regularly
distributed, large, deep roots of low density
(Haslam 1970). The clumped, high density, shallow
roots of S. patens, a caespitose grass, are probably
responsible for the se~eere microtopographic
relief (e.g., hummocks and hollows) and the higher
spatial and temporal variation in redox potentials
The relationship of age to biomass and soil propeities
can indicate the number of' years necessary
to generate significant changes in edaphic characteristics
Perhaps the most notable aspect of this
study is the speed of both the invasion and the
subsequent soil changes From its first documented
appearance on the island in 1971 until 1991, Phmg:
mitas had completely- replaced 8.g.1% of the vegetated
surf.ice of the island, an average annual rate
of spread of 20% Over these ~C yr, Phragmites coverage
in the sho~tgrass community alone had incieased
fiom 084% to 44%, mostly through clonal
expansion (L. Windham unpublished data ) this
rapid replacement of the extant plant communities
is among the moie rapid rates reported for a Ph~ag
mites invasion Further, Hog [sland is a relatively
undisturbed marsh Relative sea-level iise (approximately
1 mm yr 1) hats been occuiiing at the site
(Durand 1998), but the increased water level and
salinil 7 would be expected to favor the more salttolerant
and flood-tolerant shortgrass species over
Phmgmites (Warren and Niering 1993)
Regardless of why Phragmite~ is expanding on
Hog Island, changes in soil properties occur quickly
when Ph,-agraites is plesent. Both microtopographic
relief and water levels are decreased sig
nificantly afler Phragmites has been present in a
community fo* only 3 yn These properties continue
to decrease with age, stabilizing at their lowest
levels after 8 yr and 15 yr, respectively. Interestingly,
the changes occur independently of aboveground
biomass, which would appem to be the driving fuctor
for soil alteration
Aboveground biomass of Pl~ragr~ites communities
increases beyond shortgrass communities at 8
yr of age when Phragr~ites stands reach and stabilize
at approximately 2,000 g m ~ Increases in redox
potential mirror this relationship, peaking and stabilizing
when biomass peaks and stabilizes, at approximately
8 yr of age. In less than 15 yr, a[1 of
the measmed biomass and soil variables in Phrag
mites communities ~each their peak differences
fi-om shortgrass communities These rapid changes
likely create a positive feedback loop promoting
Phrag,mites dominance over time and increasing
rates of clonal expansion
As nitrogen is commonly a limiting nutrient in
brackish tidal marshes, alterations of biogeochemical
nitrogen wcling may be one method by which
differences m environmental characteristics promote
PI~ragmites dominance A substantial increase
in aboveground biomass should ieflect an associated
increase in dissoNed inorganic nitrogen uptake
(Mendelssohn 1979). Given known limitations
on nitrogen uptake by- plants under low redox potentials
(DeLaune et ab 1984; Bmdick et a l 1989),
Phragmites may- become a better competitor for this
limiting nutrient by altering the rhizosphere Buried
organic nitrogen may- be mineralized foster in
a more oxic envilonment, thereby increasing ammonium
supply rates Further, small increases in
salinity- levels on the high marsh have been stiovwt
to inhibit nitrogen uptake (Bandyopadhyay et ab
199S), reduce the soil capacity for ammonium adsorption
(Rysgaard et al. 1999), and limit prmiary
productivity- (Deschenes and Serodes 1985), often
due to the high energy investments necessary to
exclude salts (Cavalieri and Huang 1981). In accordance
with the resource ratio hypothesis (Tilman
1982), an increase in nitrogen availability-may
be an additional mechanism to account for the
continually successful invasion of Phragmites into
undisturbed shortgiass communities
Uptake of dissolved nitrogen into microbial biomass
may increase due to the larger surf:ace asJd
belowground litter pools of Phragw~ites comniunities
(Bowden 1987) Other effects, such as a reduced
salinity and higher redox potentials, may
serve a role in increasing rates of niuification
Some of the highest observed wetland nitrification
rates were measured in freshwater Phrccg~ites beds
(gowden kqS ~") . Additionally, accumulated hydrogen
sulfide (Hs8) has been found to inhibit nitrifying
bacteria for at least 24 h after Hz8 formation
(Joye and i-{ollibaugh 1995). This suggests that
shortgrass communities, through their fluctuating
and depressed redox potentials, may have a lowei
capacity- for generating nitrate, even when periodically
aerobic If the replacement of shortgrass
comnmnities with Phragmites Leduces the build-up
of HsS and other reduced sulfides m the soil, this
change in species composition may increase the
rate of nitrification
The vertical accumulation rates of organic and
mineral matter are likely to be higher in Ph~agw~ites
stands than ixl neighboring 5pc~tirtc~ stands, A high
rate of peat build-up may- decrease the duration
and depth os and possibly reduce the loss
os nutrients, gy raising the soil surf:ace, nitrate produced
within Phra~mite~ marsh may be less susceptible
to tidal flushing, and instead may be increasingly
used in denitrification, since denitrification
[n cm~bon-rich sediments has been found to be nitrate-
limited (Sei~zinger et ab f991), Coupling of
high rates os nitrification and denitrification can
play a strong role in reducing eutiophic pressures
in a marsh f~oni nitrogen [oading ( ~ i t n e y e[ al,
1981), As can be seen by- the inherent differences
between the plant communities, the long standing
question of the relative importance of tidal marshes
as sources or sinks f~Jr nitrogen (Nixon 1980)
may best be asked on a community-by-community
level.
While the causes of Phra~ites invasions into undisturbed
brackish tidal marshes of New_Jersey remain
unknown, we have demonstrated physical
consequences of Phragmite,s invasions to the high
marsh environment. The associations of" edaphic
features with age suggest that Phrag~ites expansion
into shortgrass communities g~eatly increases
aboveground biomass arid redox potentials, and
decreases soil surf~Jce salinity-, marsh water levels,
asJd microtopographic relief. These edaphic differences
suggest that ecos3~stem processes will be altered
when Phr~gf~ites invades a tidal brackish
marsh. We predict that in comparison with shortgrass
communities, nitrogen cycling will be llloYe
loosely coupled with tidal fluxes in a Phxagmites
conimunity, due to greater internal cycling of
stored nitrogen and losses through denitrification.
These demonstrated differences suggest the species
composition of marsh vegetation may be important
to defining the role of salt marshes as a
source or a sink os nutrients for coastal waters.