xabstract
Fish exclosures were deployed within
shallow, eutrophic Lake Rotoroa, Hamilton, New
Zealand to assess the influence of an alien-dominated
fish population on establishment by charophytes.
Replicated mesh exclosures were placed at sites
differing in wave exposure and received transplanted
charophyte oospores and plants, with identical
material placed outside. Charophyte establishment
from oospores and plant biomass were greater inside
exclosures compared with outside. Wave exposure
did not depress germling response and the effect of
fish exclosures on charophyte establishment was
least apparent at the most exposed site. Exclosures
did not have a statistically significant influence on
the light climate, and epiphytic algal development
was similar or higher inside the exclosures.
However, sediment mobilisation was lower inside
the exclosures. Results suggest that fish were
primarily responsible for the poor performance of
unprotected charophytes in Lake Rotoroa, with fish
effects on plants operating via direct disturbance or
grazing.

xintroduction
The "alternative stable states" hypothesis recognises
that shallow, eutrophic lakes can exist in one of two
conditions; either with abundant submerged plants
and relatively high water clarity or without conspicuous
vegetation and with highly turbid waters
(Scheffer 1989; Scheffer et al. 1993). Plant presence
and clear water is viewed as desirable by water-body
managers, but this condition has proven difficult to
achieve for turbid, shallow lakes. In particular,
certain feedback mechanisms that act to maintain the
turbid state need to be minimised or overcome
(Scheffer et al. 1993).
In recent years a role for fish populations in maintaining
turbid conditions in shallow lakes has been
identified. Excessive densities of benthivorous and
planktivorous fish in European lakes have been
implicated in the resuspension of lake sediments and
the promotion of phytoplankton (Meijer et al. 1990),
whereas associated substrate disturbance is suggested
to prevent colonisation by submerged
vegetation (Ten Winkel & Meulemans 1984).
Herbivorous fish have also contributed directly to the
loss of vegetation elements (van Donk & Otte 1996).
The deliberate reduction of fish stocks in lakes,
termed "biomanipulation", is now a recognised
management tool to increase water clarity and
facilitate plant recovery (Scheffer et al. 1993).
Much of the evidence for direct fish effects on
lake vegetation has been derived from enclosure or
exclosure experiments which concentrate on the fate
of transplanted or extant plants (e.g., Crivelli 1983;
Vermaat et al. 1990; Wright & Phillips 1992; van
Donk et al. 1994). Investigations of fish effects on
plant establishment from seed banks are more
limited, despite the likely importance of these
processes for restoration of submerged vegetation
(de Winton & Clayton 1996; de Winton et al. 2000a).
Ten Winkel & Meulemans (1984) observed that
cages placed to exclude fish enabled charophytes to
establish from oospores in the sediment of a Dutch
lake. In contrast, Sager et al. (1998) concluded that
wave exposure in shallow North American marshes
was more important than fish activity in reducing
plant establishment from a transplanted propagule
bank. In the latter study it was found that high wave
exposure eroded the transplanted propagule bank
material, while high levels of suspended solids
provided a poor light environment for propagule
establishment and led to propagule burial at sheltered
sites.
Sudden declines in submerged vegetation abundance
have occurred in a number of shallow New
Zealand lakes, in association with deteriorating water
quality and ecological value (de Winton &
Champion 1993). In most cases lakes have remained
de-vegetated and where plant expansion has taken
place, this has proceeded slowly over a number of
years (Champion et al. 1996; de Winton et al. 2000b;
Champion & Burns 2001). Obstacles to plant
recovery have been identified, including insufficient
light availability (Tanner et al. 1993) or low numbers
of viable propagules in lake sediments (de Winton
& Clayton 1996; de Winton et al. 2000). However,
the role of fish in influencing vegetation establishment
has not been investigated, despite evidence of
its importance overseas. As management agencies
in this country show increasing interest in restoring
aquatic habitats, it has become more important to
identify the barriers preventing submerged vegetation
recovery.
New Zealand waters lack bream (Abramis brama)
and roach (Rutilis rutilis), the fish species most often
implicated in plant loss from European waters,
however, other alien benthivorous and herbivorous
fish species have been introduced to many shallow
lakes. These species frequently occupy a dietary
niche that is underrepresented within the native fish
fauna. Alien fish were originally introduced to
establish "coarse" angling in habitats that were
unsuitable for trout, or for ornamental ponds, and
have become widespread. With the exception of
grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) used for
aquatic weed control (Clayton et al. 1995) and
aspects of herbivory by rudd (Scardinius erythropthalmus)
on aquatic plants (Lake et al. 2002), the
effects of alien fish on submerged vegetation in this
country are little known.
In this paper we examine the effect of fish
occurrence on the establishment from oospores and
survival of charophytes in Lake Rotoroa, a shallow,
eutrophic New Zealand lake with a fishery dominated
by alien species. The managers of Lake
Rotoroa identified a water clarity goal of 2.5 m
Secchi disc depth and sought to establish extensive
beds of charophytes to improve and protect lake
water quality (Hamilton City Council 1994).
Although biomanipulation was raised as a possible
means of achieving these goals, there was little
evidence to support this course of action. This study
was initiated to detect whether the fish species
present in this lake influenced establishment of
charophytes. As wave exposure has also been identified
as an important factor for the establishment of
propagules (Sager et al. 1998), we investigate the
importance for charophyte establishment of relative
wave exposure within the lake.


xmethods
Lake Rotoroa (37°48'S; 175°16'E) is a small (54 ha)
water-body located within the city of Hamilton, New
Zealand and is managed by the local city council as
a park reserve. The lake is shallow with >54% of lake
area being <2 m deep (Fig. 1) and has a catchment
area of 138 ha, comprised of 25% residential housing
and 35% recreational reserve (Tanner et al. 1990).
The lake is described as eutrophic (de Winton et al.
2000b) based on mean water quality parameters of
chlorophyll a (15.5 mg m–3), Secchi disc depth
(1.57 m), total phosphorus (P) (24.7 mg m–3), and
total nitrogen (N) (713 mg m–3) for the period mid
1999-mid 2000.
European perch (Perca fluviatilis) were introduced
to Lake Rotoroa in 1907 to establish a sport
fishery. Brown bullhead catfish (Ameiurus nebulosus)
probably entered the lake from the hydrologically
linked Waikato River in 1976/77 and rudd
(S. erythropthalmus) were illegally released in c.
1979. Tench (Tinca tinca) were legally released in
1990 to provide a new sport fishery (Kane 1995).
Fish species within Lake Rotoroa (Table 1) and their
diets are described by Kane (1995) from surveys
carried out in 1993/94. Fish included benthic feeders
(catfish, tench, juvenile perch, and rudd) herbivores
(adult rudd), and piscivores (adult perch and native
eels). Alien species listed above numbered >90% of
the large fish (>100 mm FL) that were caught at that
time (Kane 1995).
The lake vegetation and its management before
1987 is documented by Tanner et al. (1990) who
describe an extensive submerged vegetation covering
80% of the lake area comprising native
charophytes, but invaded by a succession of alien,
hydrocharitacean weeds. Alien species Lagarosiphon
major and Elodea canadensis dominated the
vegetation in 1977, but were then largely replaced
by Egeria densa by 1986. In the 1970s and 1980s,
the herbicide diquat was applied to reduce nuisance
weed beds, with the effect of enhancing charophyte
abundance. In mid 1986 charophytes comprised 52%
of the vegetation (Tanner et al. 1990).
During the late 1980s, the lake vegetation underwent
a dramatic decline, concomitant with decreasing
water clarity (Clayton & de Winton 1994).
Between 1994 and 1998, submerged plants were
estimated to occupy <1% of the lakebed, but an
expansion of charophyte vegetation took place from
late 1998 onwards (de Winton et al. 2000b). This
vegetation development mirrored changes in water
clarity with Secchi disc depths showing a mean
increase of 0.05 m per year over 1992-97, and a
larger mean increase of 0.11 m per year from 1997
to 2000 (de Winton et al. 2000b). At the time of this
investigation charophytes occupied c. 15% of the
lake area, were observed to a maximum depth of
1.9 m, and hydrocharitacean species were not
recorded (de Winton et al. 2000b).

We used fish exclosures to detect the effects of fish
on establishing charophytes in Lake Rotoroa.
Exclosures were deployed at three sites (Fig. 1)
chosen to provide different degrees of wave exposure.
Relative exposure at each site was calculated
using a method modified from Keddy (1982) as the
sum of wind direction x fetch for each of eight
compass directions, where the wind direction (% of
records) was based on 8760 wind records from June
1999 to June 2000 (Ruakura Climate Station) and
fetch was the distance to shore (km). On this basis,
the three sites were ranked from most sheltered,
intermediate in exposure, to most exposed.
Three fish exclosures were deployed at each site
in October 1999, within 1.1-1.3 m depth. No plants
were observed in the immediate vicinity and
sediment substrates were observed to be fine (no
conspicuous sand or hard substrates). Exclosures
(2.5 x 2.5 m) were constructed from Donaghys Quad
Hail Net® (7 mm mesh aperture) supported by
surface floats and anchored into the lakebed. The
netting was cleaned at monthly intervals to maximise
water exchange. A 0.3 m tall barrier above the
perimeter of the floats prevented waterfowl from
perching on the structure.
Sediment known to contain abundant viable
oospores was collected from Lake Okataina
(38°09'S, 176°23'E) and Lake Tarawera (38°13'S,
176°24'E), Rotorua District, and stored at 20°C for
2 weeks. Each sediment was mixed in a concrete
mixer and decanted into 395 ml pots. Ten pots of
each lake sediment were placed in each exclosure
and also at an equivalent depth outside the exclosure.
Charophyte establishment was assessed after 15
weeks. Germlings from each pot were detected by
eye, sorted into species according to oospore and
germling characteristics, counted, and dried (80°C)
to constant weight (±0.0001 g).
Plants of Chara corallina were collected from
Lake Rotoroa, planted in pots of lake sediment and
grown in outdoor tanks for 3 weeks to facilitate
rhizoid anchorage. Uniform-size plants were
selected, comprising 3-4 stems of 50-80 mm in
height. Three plants were placed inside and outside
each exclosure, with an additional 19 plants of
similar size dried to constant weight as above to
estimate starting biomass. Transplanted plants were
recovered after 3 weeks, individually dried, and
weighed as above.
Key water quality parameters inside and outside
the exclosures were monitored at 2-week intervals
(turbidity, photosynthetically active radiation
(PAR)) or 4-week intervals (chlorophyll a).
Measurements of PAR were made subsurface and at
0.43 and 0.86 m depth (Licor LI-188 B Quantum
photometer) and mean light attenuation (Kd) was
calculated according to Kirk (1994). A depth integrated
water sample was taken to 0.8 m depth.
Turbidity of two subsamples was measured by a
nephelometric turbidimeter (Hach 21 00P). Chlorophyll
a samples (400 ml) were transported on ice,
filtered (GF/C glass fibre), ground, and analysed by
a spectrophotometric method (Pridmore et al. 1983).
A sediment trap (78 mm diam.) was placed at the
centre of each exclosure and outside each exclosure
for the duration of the experiment and the accumulated
sediment was dried (80°C) to constant weight
(±0.01 g). A substrate for epiphytic algae was
provided by placing plastic tags (9750 mm2) just
above the sediment surface, both inside and outside
each exclosure. Upon retrieval after 3 weeks, both
surfaces of the tags were scrubbed with a fine brush,
the material homogenised and analysed for chlorophyll
a as outlined above.
Germling number per pot, germling dry weight
per pot, and transplant dry weight per pot were log10
transformed to stabilise variance among samples,
and statistically significant differences (P < 0.05)
were identified by a split-split plot ANOVA (Genstat
5). The block stratum was the nine chosen areas
(three sites x three exclosure—open lake pairs), the
main plot stratum was the two treatments of
exclosure or open lake and the subplot level was
individual pots (to identify sediment type effects).
An ANOVA was used to identify significant differences
(P < 0.05) in water quality between exclosures
and the open lake, and within site differences
were also considered in the analysis. An ANOVA
was also used to analyse sedimentation data, while
a t-test was employed to identify differences in
epiphytic algal development.

xresults
Relative wave exposure ranged from most shelter at
Site A, intermediate exposure at Site B, and greatest
exposure at Site C (Fig. 1). Relative exposure
differed by 80% between Sites A and B, and 20%
between Sites B and C.
With one exception, mean light attenuation (Kd)
was similar within and outside the exclosures, with
Kd lower inside exclosures compared with outside
(ANOVA, P < 0.001) on one date only (Fig. 2).
Although mean turbidity of exclosures was frequently
0.3-0.5 nephelometric turbidity units (NTU)
lower than external values, differences in chlorophyll
a levels of water samples were not significant (Fig.
3). No consistent site differences in these parameters
were detected. Epiphytic algal development
(chlorophyll a; Table 2) did not differ significantly
between the inside and outside exclosures at Site A
or Site B (t-test, P 0.05), but was significantly
higher within Site C exclosures compared with
outside (t -test, P < 0.05). Overall, sedimentation
(Table 2) was significantly greater outside the exclosures
(ANOVA, P < 0.001), although differences
were not detected at Site B (ANOVA, P 0.05). A
missing sediment trap lowered statistical power for
this latter site (Table 2).
Only occasional small fish (<50 mm length,
species unidentified) were observed inside the
exclosures. Lake level fluctuated by 0.203 m, with
an overall reduction in water level over the course
of the trial.
Germling response from the Okataina sediment was
dominated by C. corallina (92% of germlings),
whereas the Tarawera sediment response was
predominantly C. globularis (99% of germlings).
Differences in germling number and biomass were
identified between the two sediment types (ANOVA,
P < 0.05). The original sediment level in pots was
discernible at the end of the trial and erosion or
deposition was not observed.
Germling number and biomass were consistently
greater inside the fish exclosures than outside (Fig.
4 and 5). The mean reduction in germling number
per pot from outside compared with inside the exclosures
ranged from 42 to >99% across the three sites
(Fig. 4). The mean reduction in germling biomass
per pot from outside compared with inside the
exclosures ranged from 66 to >99% across the three
sites (Fig. 5). The differences between germling
establishment inside and outside exclosures were
significant (ANOVA, P < 0.001), with the exception
of germling number arising from Okataina sediment
and the germling biomass of Tarawera sediment
(ANOVA, P 0.05) at the most exposed site, Site
C (Fig. 4 and 5).
Germling number and biomass of pots placed
outside the exclosures differed significantly among
the three sites (ANOVA, P < 0.05), with mean
germling number and biomass being greater at the
exposed Site C than at the sheltered Site A (Fig. 4
and 5). Conversely, no comparable site differences
were identified for pots from within the exclosures
(ANOVA, P 0.05).
The biomass of C. corallina plants transplanted into
the fish exclosures was significantly greater
(ANOVA, P < 0.05) than transplanted plants placed
outside the exclosures at all three sites (Fig. 6). This
reduction in plant biomass outside exclosures ranged
from 70 to 95% across the three sites. No significant
site differences were identified (ANOVA, P 0.05).
Exclosure plants had increased in biomass (Fig. 6),
whereas outside plants were often missing entirely
(one-third of plants) or were noticeably reduced in
biomass.
During the trial, Nitella hookeri/N. cristata (a
species pair difficult to distinguish) had also colonised
several exclosures from vegetative fragments.
No colonisation was observed immediately outside
the exclosures.

xdiscussion
Restricted fish access resulted in consistently greater
charophyte germination, growth, and survival,
suggesting that fish do reduce the potential for plant
re-colonisation within Lake Rotoroa.
Reduced wave exposure by the exclosures does
not appear to have been a major factor in influencing
charophyte performance. First, where differences in
charophyte establishment were detected among the
three sites (outside exclosures only), the most
exposed site had the greatest germling response. In
addition, germling response differed least between
the exclosures and open areas at the most exposed
site (Site C). These results suggest wave exposure
was not a major inhibiting factor for charophyte
establishment at the experimental sites in this lake.
We also did not detect effects of exclosures upon
water quality parameters that were likely to mediate
the enhanced charophyte performance. In our trial
the exclosures did not present a significantly better
light environment than external areas. Although
turbidity of exclosures was slightly lower than
external values, these differences (0.3-0.5 NTU)
were extremely small when considering the wide
range of turbidity of natural waters. Light attenuation
values provide a more meaningful measure of conditions
for plant germination and growth. In contrast,
Sager et al. (1998) found that plastic encased
exclosures that enhanced propagule establishment
also modified wave exposure/water exchange to the
point where total suspended solids, chlorophyll a,
and light attenuation were dramatically reduced.
Although we did find bottom sediment mobilisation
and/or deposition was higher outside the
exclosures, this disturbance was apparently local
since it did not impact significantly on the light
climate. Nor was there any observable erosion or
burial of the sediments in the transplanted pots. The
local sediment mobilisation and/or deposition
outside the exclosures suggested a higher frequency
or extent of sediment disturbance when exposed to
fish activity. Elsewhere, activity by benthivorous fish
in small, shallow lakes is seen as a major cause of
sediment resuspension (Meijer et al. 1990). This is
also in keeping with observations by SCUBA divers
in Lake Rotoroa of pitting of the sediment in a
manner characteristic offish disturbance (de Winton
et al. 2000b). The loss of transplanted plants from
outside the exclosures also indicates direct uprooting
or grazing, as plants would have persisted under
stress (i.e., unsuitable growth conditions) for longer
than the 3-week growth period.
Nest building by freshwater fish is a source of
disturbance of submerged vegetation in temperate
Northern Hemisphere lakes (Carpenter & McCreary
1985), however no nests or egg masses were
observed in this trial.
Grazing by herbivorous waterfowl is cited as one
factor preventing plant re-establishment in shallow
lakes (Lauridsen et al. 1994), but we do not consider
it to be important in this water-body. Low densities
( 0.5 ha–1) of coot (Fulica atra) and black swan
(Cygnus atratus, 0.1 ha–1) were recorded at Lake
Rotoroa during the past 5 years (New Zealand
Ornithological Society monthly counts). These
waterfowl densities are 1-2 orders of magnitude less
than levels suggested to influence macrophyte
establishment (Lauridsen et al. 1994; van Donk &
Otte 1996).
Our results did not support the theory that fish
predation of snail grazers promotes epiphytic algal
development and leads to suppression of submerged
plant growth (Brönmark & Weisner 1992).
Smothering by epiphytic algae did not explain the
lower charophyte response outside exclosures, as
epiphytic algal development outside exclosures was
either similar to, or was lower than, exclosure values.
Although fish activities may also indirectly affect
plant presence by decreasing water clarity (Meijer
et al. 1990), our experiments would not detect such
influences due to the exclosure design. Other
workers have also established from exclosure/
enclosure trials that fish can reduce plant biomass
directly without affecting water clarity (Crivelli
1983; Ten Winkel & Meulemans 1984; Vermaat et
al. 1990).
We conclude that fish activities are the major
factors responsible for the lower charophyte
performance outside exclosures. This finding is in
contrast to Sager et al. (1998), who found wave
exposure, not fish (common carp) access, to be an
overriding influence for propagule establishment,
although their conclusion probably reflects the larger
size, shallow depths, and higher relative exposure of
their study sites compared with Lake Rotoroa. It is
not possible to confirm which fish species in Lake
Rotoroa were responsible, however we suggest the
impact on plants was mediated directly via uprooting,
shading by deposited sediment, mechanical
damage of plants, grazing, or some combination of
these mechanisms.
From other studies, there is considerable evidence
that fish can compromise the condition of shallow,
eutrophic lakes. Similarly, our results indicate that
the alien fish communities in shallow New Zealand
lakes may not be compatible with management goals
to protect and enhance water quality. In particular,
the early establishment of charophytes is sensitive
to fish influences and yet may be critical for the
restoration of shallow lakes.