xabstract
plant invasion may impact ecosystem structure and function, and further affect soil organic matter (SOM)dynamics. However, the influence of plant invasion on soil organic carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) poolssizes, stability, and turnover in SOM of invaded ecosystems is not fully understood. In this study, soil Cand N contents, and 13C and 15N values of free light fraction (LF), intra-aggregate particulate organicmatter (iPOM) and mineral-associated organic matter (mSOM) were investigated in an invasive Spartinaalterniflora community, adjacent bare flat and native Suaeda salsa and Phragmites australis communities.Short-term S. alterniflora invasion significantly enhanced organic C and N contents in SOM, free LF, iPOM,mSOM compared with bare flat and increased the proportion of allocated C in iPOM compared withS. salsa and P. australis soils (0ñ0.30 m depth). The proportion of the 
S. alterniflora-derived C in free LFand iPOM were significantly higher than that in mSOM, and the highest S. alterniflora-derived Content was found in iPOM of S. alterniflora soil. The most enriched 15N values were found in S. alterniflorasoil. Increased 15N values and decreased C:N ratios from the free LF to iPOM to mSOM in S. alterniflorasoil indicated a greater degree of decomposition. The results suggest that 10-year S. alterniflora invasionsignificantly alters soil organic C and N pools sizes and stability through changing plant residuals input,physical distribution of S. alterniflora-derived C and C turnover in SOM fractions.

xintroduction
Soil organic matter (SOM) contains huge carbon (C) and nitrogen(N) pools in terrestrial ecosystems (Sollins et al., 2009), and plays acritical role in global C (Amundson, 2001; Throop et al., 2013) andN cycling (Sollins et al., 2009). Any alteration to the SOM pool mayevoke changes in greenhouse gas levels and potentially impacts theclimate (Cheng et al., 2011; Throop et al., 2013). However, plantinvasion, a growing threat to native ecosystems (in terms of sta-bility, biodiversity, processes and functions) in many parts of theworld (Ehrenfeld, 2003; Fernandes et al., 2014), could affect net pri-mary production, nutrient input to the soil (e.g., litter of invasive plant and epiphyte, exudates) and litter decomposition in nativeecosystems (Liao et al., 2007). This could ultimately influence SOMformation and turnover (Liao et al., 2006).The effects of plant invasion on C and N pools in SOM are drawingincreased attention (Jackson et al., 2002; Hughes et al., 2006; Liaoet al., 2006; Strickland et al., 2010).
Previous studies have reportedthat plant invasion can enhance soil C and N sequestration due toincreased above- and below-ground biomass inputs into the soiland/or decreased litter decomposition (Hibbard et al., 2001; Liaoet al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2010). Conversely, some studies haveshown that plant invasion causes soil C and N loss (Johnson andWedin, 1997; Jackson et al., 2002; Strickland et al., 2010) or nosignificant change (McCarron et al., 2003; Hughes et al., 2006).These inconsistent results may be that the response of C and Npools in SOM to plant invasion may be influenced by multiple fac-tors, including the quality and quantity of the litter and roots, litterdecomposition rate (Liao et al., 2007), as well as soil C and N min-eralization (Yang et al., 2013). Therefore, understanding how plantinvasion both impact C and N pools sizes in SOM and control the stability and turnover of C and N pools in SOM is important for pre-dicting long-term ecosystem C and N cycling. However, accuratelydetecting the
influence of plant invasion on C and N pools sizes, sta-bility and turnover in SOM of native ecosystems is difficult as SOMis a complex entity with distinct fractions characterized by differ-ent turnover times and degrees of physical and chemical stability(Del Galdo et al., 2003; Cheng et al., 2011; Herold et al., 2014).Combining physical SOM fractionation techniques with stableisotope analyses provides an effective approach for examiningchanges in C content and sources of input for SOM fractions andassessing C stability following plant invasion (Throop et al., 2013).Physical fractionation techniques can be used to separate bulk soilinto free light fraction (LF), intra-aggregate particulate organic mat-ter (iPOM) and mineral-associated organic matter (mSOM) (Sixet al., 1998). According to the evidence that Wander (2004) andMarÌn-Spiotta et al. (2008) have reported that free LF and iPOMwere considered to represent the soil active and the slowly miner-alized pools, respectively. mSOM is considered to be
representative of soil passive pool and ultimately determines long-term soil Cand N sequestration due to its interactions with mineral surfaces(Kˆgel-Knabner et al., 2008; Schulze et al., 2009).13C values between C4plants (mean 13C ò -11â) and C3plants (mean 13C ò -27â) produce distinct isotopic signatures inSOM and its fractions (Cheng et al., 2011). Based on the alterationsin the 13C values of SOM and its fractions following changes tothe vegetation, C4-derived C contribution ratio and turnover rateof C in SOM and its fractions were quantified according to an iso-tope mass balance equation (Del Galdo et al., 2003; Liao et al., 2006;Cheng et al., 2011). In addition, soil 15N was demonstrated to beable to be used as a tracer for N cycling processes and is a poten-tial indicator of SOM quality (Robinson, 2001; Bijoor et al., 2008;Dou et al., 2013). For example, increased soil 15N values revealedenhanced rates of N cycling accompanied by N losses (Billings,2006; Dou et al., 2013). Soil 15N values become enriched withhigher degrees of SOM decomposition and humification (Templeret al., 2007; Marin-Spiotta et al., 2009).Spartina alterniflora, a perennial C4grass native to North Amer-ica, was introduced to China for beach protection purposes in 1979(Xu and Zhuo, 1985). S. alterniflora reproduction contains sexualpropagation by seed and clonal propagation by rhizome and veg-etative fragmentation (Daehler and Strong, 1994), which plays animportant role in exploiting new habitats (Wang et al., 2006). Due toits rapid growth, S. alterniflora has dispersed broadly from Tianjin inthe north to Beihai in the south and covers a total area of approx-imately 112,000 ha (An et al., 2007). Suaeda salsa and Phragmitesaustralis are annual and perennial C3grass, respectively. Currently,S. alterniflora has rapidly expanded by occupying bare flat andreplacing S. salsa and P. australis to become one of dominant plantsin east coast of China (An et al., 2007).Previous studies have found S. alterniflora has higher leaf areaindex and 
net photosynthetic rate, and greater net primary pro-duction (Liao et al., 2007), well-developed root system comparedto native species (Wang et al., 2006), and hence impacts ecosys-tem C and N stocks (Liao et al., 2007; Cheng et al., 2008), altersecosystemñatmosphere exchange of CH4, CO2and N2O (Yuan et al.,2015), as well as soil physicochemical properties (Yang et al., 2013)in coastal wetlands of China. However, little is known about theimpacts of S. alterniflora invasion on soil organic C and N pools sizes,stability and turnover in SOM and its fractions. We hypothesizedthat S. alterniflora invasion could significantly affect soil organicC and N pools sizes and stability through changing plant resid-uals input, physical distribution of S. alterniflora-derived C and Cturnover in SOM fractions. To test this hypothesis, soil C and Ncontents, 13C and 15N values of SOM and its fractions were exam-ined in 10 years S. alterniflora community compared to bare flat, S.salsa and P. australis communities in a coastal salt marsh of eastern China. The objectives of this study were to: (1) quantify soil organicC and N pools sizes and the contribution of S. alterniflora-derivedC inputs to SOC in SOM and its fractions following S. alterniflorainvasion; and (2) estimate soil organic C and N pools stability andC turnover following S. alterniflora invasion.

xmethods

2.1 sitedescriptionsThe study was conducted in the core region of the JiangsuYancheng Wetland National Nature Reserve, Rare Birds (JYWN-NRRB) (32?4847ñ34?2928N, and 119?5345ñ121?1812E)(Fig. 1). The total area of JYWNNRRB is about 247,260 ha, the corearea of JYWNNRRB is about 22,596 ha, the buffer area of JYWN-NRRB is about 56,742 ha, and the experimental area of JYWNNRRBis about 167,922 ha. JYWNNRRB is the first and largest coastal wet-land conservation zone in China (Wang and Wall, 2010; Yang et al.,2013). JYWNNRRB is made up of aggrading mudflats with a meanannual temperature of approximately 13.8?C, mean annual pre-cipitation of approximately 1000 mm (Mao et al., 2010), and meanannual seawater salinity of approximately 3.09% (Zhou et al., 2009).JYWNNRRB was designated as an internationally important wet-land site (Ramsar) in 2002, and it plays a key role in protectingwaterfowl (e.g., Grus japonensis) and other fauna, as well as naturalmudflat wetlands (Wang and Wall, 2010).S. alterniflora was transplanted to the bare flat of the JYWNNRRBin 1983, and it rapidly expanded to form large areas of S. alterni-flora salt marshes over the next 30 years (Zhang et al., 2004). Theseaward S. alterniflora region is bare flat, that is there was no veg-etation before the S. alterniflora invasion (Yang et al., 2013). Bare flat, S. alterniflora and S. salsa communities are in the lower, middleand high regions of the intertidal zone, respectively, and P. australiscommunity is in the supralittoral zone (Yuan et al., 2015). Accord-ingly, JYWNNRRB has a clear distribution of vegetation successionfrom the sea to inland, i.e., from bare flat to S. alterniflora commu-nity to S. salsa community to P. australis community (Fig. 1; Yanget al., 2013). There is little overlap between the distributions of thevegetation communities (Zhou et al., 2009).2.2. Soil and plant samplingThree parallel transects, 5 km long and 50 m wide, along a vege-tation succession gradient from bare flat (i.e., the control, no inputof organic matter from vegetation) to S. alterniflora community toS. salsa community to P. australis community in JYWNNRRB wereselected in November, 2012 (Fig. 1). The sampled transects whichwere covered by S. alterniflora community were bare flat before2002 (Yao et al., 2010).Within each transect, four locations were marked from bareflat to S. alterniflora, S. salsa and P. australis communities (Fig. 1).Five 2 m ◊ 2 m plots were randomly selected in each location, andthree soil cores (0.05 m diameter ◊ 0.30 m depth) were randomlycollected in each plot. The soil cores from each plot were thor-oughly mixed to form a composite sample. Three 0.50 m ◊ 0.50 mquadrats were randomly established to collect plant leaves andlitter, and three soil sampling blocks (0.15 m length ◊ 0.15 mwidth ◊ 0.30 m depth) were excavated to obtain the root biomass inS. alterniflora, S. salsa and P. australis communities in each location,respectively.Each soil sampling block was put through a 100 mesh sieve andrinsed thoroughly with water, and the roots that remained in thesieve were collected. The collected leaves, litter and roots werecleaned and dried at 65?C to a constant weight. Plant residualswere removed from the soil samples, and the soil samples werepassed through a 2 mm sieve and oven-dried at 50?C. Fresh soilsubsample was oven dried at 105?C to determine soil moisture(Yang et al., 2013). The bulk density was measured using cuttingring method. Soil pH was determined at a 1:2 (soil:water) suspen-sion (Fu et al., 2015). Soil EC was determined at a 1:5 (soil:water)mixture with a conductivity meter (Yang et al., 2013).2.3. Soil size and density fractionationSoil free LF, iPOM and mSOM were obtained according to soilsize and density fractionation procedure which referenced fromGregorich and Ellert (1993), Six et al. (1998) and Wu et al. (2004),and summarized in Fig. 2. A 25 g soil subsample was weighed andsuspended in 50 mL of 1.70 g mL-1NaI in a 100 mL centrifuge tube.The centrifuge tube was stoppered and shaken at 200 rpm for 1 h,and the materials that adhered to the stopper and sides of the cen-trifuge tube were washed into suspension with 3ñ5 mL NaI. Thesuspended sample was centrifuged at 1000 g for 20 min. The float-ing materials (free LF) were aspirated onto a 0.45 m nylon filterwith a vacuum pump, rinsed with 75 mL of 0.01 M CaCl2followedby at least 75 mL of ultrapure water, and dried at 50?C. The floatingmaterials in the centrifuge tube were extracted twice with NaI, andthe two sub-fractions were mixed thoroughly to form a free LF sam-ple and weighed (Gregorich and Ellert, 1993; Wu et al., 2004). Theprecipitation in the centrifuge tube was heavy fraction (HF), whichwas washed twice with 50 mL ultrapure water and dispersed in0.5% sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) by shaking for 18 h on areciprocal shaker. The dispersed heavy fraction was passed througha 53-m sieve. The materials remaining on the sieve, the intra-aggregate particulate organic matter (iPOM) + sand, were dried at50?C and weighed (Six et al., 1998). The soil and water mixturethat passed through a 53-m sieve was poured into the centrifugetube. The mineral-associated organic matter (mSOM) + clay + siltwas obtained through centrifugation and decantation of the super-natant using ultrapure water to remove SHMP, dried at 50?C andweighed. 2.4. Carbon and nitrogen concentrations and isotope analysesSamples of leaves, litter, roots, whole soil, free LF, iPOM andmSOM fractions obtained from Section 2.3. soil size and densityfractionation procedures were dried to a constant weight andpassed through 100-mesh sieves. Subsamples of whole soil and itsfractions were treated with 1 N HCl at room temperature for 24 h toeliminate total inorganic carbon. The 13C and 15N values, C andN concentrations for subsamples of the leaves, litter, roots, wholesoil and its fractions were determined using an IsoPrime100 iso-tope ratio mass spectrometer (Isoprime Ltd., Cheadle Hulme, UK)coupled to a vario PYRO cube elemental analyzer (Elementar Anal-ysensystem GmbH, Hanau, Germany). C and N isotope ratios wereindicated by i X as follows:
iX
=

RSAMPLE
RSTANDARD

ñ1

◊
1000 â (1)where X stands for either C or N, RSAMPLE= (13C/12C) or (15N/14N)ratio of the sample, and RSTANDARD=13C/12C ratio of the PeeDee Belemnite (PDB) standard, or15N/14N ratio of atmosphericN2. The accuracy of repeat measurements was ± 0.13â for 13Cand ± 0.21â for 15N.The proportion of S. alterniflora-derived C (fnew) in SOM, free LF,iPOM and mSOM was determined using the mass balance equation(Del Galdo et al., 2003; Dou et al., 2013)
fnew =

inewñiold
imixñiold

◊
100% (2)where inewis the 13C value of SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOMin S. alterniflora soil, ioldis the 13C value of SOM, free LF, iPOM andmSOM in bare flat, assuming that the C input ratio has remainedrelatively stable in bare flat in the past 10 years, and imixis the 13Cvalue of the mixed S. alterniflora residue, and is a weighted averagebased on the different masses of the different plant material types(leaves, litter, and roots).The S. alterniflora-derived C content (Ccontent SA-derived, g m-2) ofSOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOM in S. alterniflora soil was calculatedas follows:
Ccontent SA-derived =
Ccontent ◊
fnew (3)where Ccontentis the C content of SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOM in S.alterniflora soil, and fnewis the proportion of S. alterniflora-derivedC in SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOM.Decomposition rate (k) of old C (i.e., soil organic C (SOC) beforeS. alterniflora invasion) (year-1) in SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOM ofS. alterniflora soil were calculated using a first-order decay model(Six et al., 1998; Six and Jastrow, 2002; Cheng et al., 2007):
At =
A0 e-kt (4)and
k
=
-ln(At/A0)
t
(5)where Atis the original SOC remaining after t years [At= (1 - fnew)Ccontentat time t], A0is the SOC content before S. alterniflora inva-sion [A0= SOC content of bare flat], t is the time since S. alterniflorainvasion, 10 years used in this study, and assuming that decompo-sition rate (k) of old C follows first-order kinetics at steady-stateconditions (Cheng et al., 2007).2.5. StatisticsData were tested for normality and log- or cube root-transformed to satisfy the assumptions for statistical analysis.One-way ANOVA was used to analyze significant differencesbetween communities for C and N contents, 13C and 15N val-ues, C:N ratios in SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOM, soil masspercent of SOM fractions, proportions of C and N allocated toSOM fractions, 13C and 15N levels, C:N ratios, biomass in plantmaterials, and each soil physicochemical property. Significant dif-ferences in soil mass percent and C:N ratios among soil fractions ineach community and the proportion of S. alterniflora-derived C, S.alterniflora-derived C content and decay rate (k) of old C among soilfractions in S. alterniflora soil were examined by one-way ANOVA.The differences in the group means were examined using Duncansignificant difference test with a significance level of P < 0.05. Linearregression analysis was conducted to correlate C and N contents ofall soil fractions with litter and root biomass. All data analyses wereperformed using SPSS 19.0.

xresults
3.1 . Soil physicochemical properties and plant biological traitsSoil moisture and EC in S. alterniflora soil were significantlyhigher than those in bare flat, S. salsa and P. australis soils, but thepH and bulk density in S. alterniflora soil were significantly lowerthan that in bare flat, S. salsa and P. australis soils (Table 1). Root(0ñ0.30 m depth) and litter biomass in the S. alterniflora commu-nity were significantly higher than those in S. salsa and P. australiscommunities (Table 2). However, there were no significant differ-ences in root and litter biomass between S. salsa and P. australiscommunities (Table 2).The 13C values of leaves, litter and roots in S. alterniflora com-munity varied from -13.60â to -13.74â, which was typical ofC4plants whereas the 13C values of C3plants, S. salsa and P. aus-tralis, varied from -27.05â to -29.45â (Table 2). The 15N valuesof S. alterniflora, S. salsa and P. australis plant materials varied from2.70â to 4.27â, 0.33â to 2.35â and -0.70â to 1.17â, respec-tively (Table 2). The leaves and litter C:N ratios in S. alterniflorawere significantly higher than those in S. salsa, and the C:N ratioof the roots in S. alterniflora was higher than that in P. australis(Table 2). 
3.2 The i13C and i15N values of SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOMThe 13C values of SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOM in S. alterniflorasoil were significantly higher than those in bare flat, S. salsa and P.australis soils (Table 3). The 15N values of SOM, free LF, iPOM andmSOM in S. alterniflora soil were significantly higher compared withbare flat and P. australis soils (Table 3). There was no statisticallysignificant difference in the 15N values of organic soil between S.alterniflora and S. salsa soils except for free LF (Table 3).3.3. C and N contents of SOM, free LF, iPOM and mSOMC and N contents of mSOM accounted for the largest fraction(52.6ñ71.6%) of total SOM across communities, except for the Ncontent of mSOM in bare flat, whereas C and N contents of free LFaccounted for the smallest fraction of total SOM across communi-ties (Fig. 3).C and N contents of SOM, iPOM and mSOM in S. alterniflora soilwere considerably higher than those in other soils, and C and Ncontents of free LF in S. alterniflora soil were higher compared withbare flat (Table 4). The free LF-C/SOC in S. alterniflora soil was signif-icantly lower than that in bare flat (Fig. 3a). The iPOM-C accountedfor 40.9% of the total SOC content in S. alterniflora soil, which wassignificantly higher than that in S. salsa and P. australis soils (Fig. 3b)even though S. alterniflora soil had the lowest mass proportion ofiPOM among communities (Fig. 4). Although S. alterniflora soil hadthe highest mass proportion of mSOM among communities (Fig. 4),the mSOM-C accounted for 56.8% of the total SOC content in S.alterniflora soil, which was significantly lower than that in S. salsasoil (Fig. 3c). The C:N ratio of SOM, iPOM and mSOM significantlyincreased in S. alterniflora soil in comparison with other soils, and the C:N ratios decreased from free LF to iPOM to SOM to mSOM inS. alterniflora soil (Fig. 5). The C and N contents of SOM, iPOM andmSOM were significantly correlated with litter and root biomass(Table 5).3.4. Soil C turnoverThe proportion of S. alterniflora-derived C in free LF (64.55%) andiPOM (60.55%) was significantly higher than that in SOM (36.36%)and mSOM (27.96%) (Fig. 6a). However, the S. alterniflora-derived Ccontent was greatest in iPOM followed by mSOM and free LF in S.alterniflora soil (Fig. 6b). The decomposition rate of old C was fasterin free LF and iPOM than in mSOM of S. alterniflora soil (Fig. 6c).
xdiscussion
Whole soil organic C and N contents increased 0.37ñ7.43-foldafter 10 years of S. alterniflora invasion in comparison to bare flatand native S. salsa and P. australis communities in a coastal saltmarsh of eastern China (Table 4). Increased whole soil organicC and N contents in the S. alterniflora community were primar-ily due to increases in C and N in mSOM and iPOM fractions(Table 4). Soil C and N sequestration following plant invasion islargely determined by the amount of litter and root biomass inputinto the soil (Hibbard et al., 2001; Liao et al., 2006). This evidencewas supported by that the S. alterniflora community had greaterlitter and root biomass compared with S. salsa and P. australis communities (Table 2). Indeed, soil C and N contents in SOM,iPOM and mSOM were strongly related to litter and root biomass(Table 5), which demonstrated that substantial S. alterniflora debrisentering the soil would accelerate C and N sequestration in SOM,iPOM and mSOM (Table 4). Additionally, the highest soil moisturewas found in S. alterniflora soil (Table 1), which was more bene-ficial to SOM accumulation by provided anaerobic soil conditionsfor long-term storage of SOM in wetlands (Whitting and Chanton,2001).S. alterniflora invasion also significantly increased C and Ncontents in free LF compared with bare flat (Table 4), whereas freeLF-C/SOC in S. alterniflora soil was significantly lower than that inbare flat (Fig. 3a). These results are consistent with the previousfinding that S. alterniflora invasion considerably raised the con-centrations of the SOC labile pool fractions but decreased labileSOC/SOC relative to bare flat in a coastal wetland of eastern China(Yang et al., 2013). The low free LF-C/SOC ratio in S. alterniflora soilwas primarily due to poorer-quality S. alterniflora residuals (i.e.,higher C:N ratio of S. alterniflora materials) (Yang et al., 2015), andmore recalcitrant to decomposition (e.g., high contents of K, Na, Ca,Mg and lignocellulosic material) (Yang et al., 2009).iPOM consists of partially decomposed organic materials andis protected within the soil aggregate structure (Leifeld and Kˆgel-Knabner, 2005). The mSOM is composed of highly humified organicresidues and is protected by organic-mineral interactions with siltsand clays (Kˆgel-Knabner et al., 2008). Higher proportion of C allo-cated in iPOM and lower proportion of C allocated in mSOM werefound in S. alterniflora soil compared to S. salsa and/or P. australissoils (Fig. 3b and c), leading to lower physical SOC stabilizationin S. alterniflora soil. Previous studies have indicated that plantmaterials are first incorporated into the coarse soil fraction (e.g.,macro-aggregates) and are then transferred from the coarse tothe fine soil fraction (e.g., silts and clays) (Desjardins et al., 2006;Schwendenmann and Pendall, 2006), the fine soil fraction obtainsa stable accumulation of SOM (Desjardins et al., 2006; Zhang et al.,2010). Hence, the increased proportion of C allocated in iPOM andthe decreased proportion of C allocated in mSOM in S. alterniflorasoil was expected as substantial S. alterniflora residues were morerapidly incorporated into iPOM than into mSOM. The S. alternifloraresidues were also resistant to decomposition (Liao et al., 2007;Yang et al., 2009, 2015), indicating the soil microbes were not eas-ier to translate it into mSOM compared to S. salsa and P. australisresidues.Our stable isotopic analyses indicated that the 13C values ofall soil fractions in S. alterniflora soil were significantly higher thanthose in bare flat, S. salsa and P. australis soils (Table 3), partly owingto the contribution of S. alterniflora residuals (Fig. 6a). The propor-tion of S. alterniflora-derived C in free LF and iPOM was significantlyhigher than that in the mSOM of S. alterniflora soil (Fig. 6a). This maybecause free LF and iPOM are mostly composed of undecomposedand partially decomposed plant materials (Gregorich et al., 2006),and iPOM-C was more influenced by litter and roots input thanmSOM (Table 5). Interestingly, S. alterniflora-derived C content wasgreatest in iPOM followed by the mSOM and free LF in S. alterniflorasoil (Fig. 6b), which suggests that S. alterniflora-derived C would noteasily convert from iPOM to mSOM in the short-term. This may bedue to the inherently more resistant nature of the S. alternifloraresiduals (Yang et al., 2009), and the more anaerobic salt marshconditions (Table 1, Zhang et al., 2010). Even though mSOM had thelowest proportion of S. alterniflora-derived C, S. alterniflora-derivedC content in mSOM was significantly higher than that in free LF ofS. alterniflora soil (Fig. 6a and b), which is probably due to free LFis not protected by aggregates or soil minerals although it had thegreatest C input rate (Fig. 6a), and is easily accessible to microbesthat induce the rapid loss of SOM (Fig. 6c; John et al., 2005; Chenget al., 2011), while mSOM is the most stable SOM fraction comparedto free LF and iPOM through its interaction with mineral surfaces(e.g., iron/aluminum oxides and hydroxides) (Kˆgel-Knabner et al.,2008; Schulze et al., 2009), it is resistant to decomposition (Fig. 6c;Liao et al., 2006). Thus, a lower decomposition rate of old C in mSOMmay compensate some decrease in S. alterniflora-derived C inputand ultimately promote S. alterniflora-derived C sequestration inmSOM relative to free LF.The 15N values of all soil fractions in S. alterniflora soil weregreater than those in bare flat and P. australis soils (Table 3). Onepossible explanation was that the mean 15N values of S. alterni-flora plant materials were significantly higher than those in S. salsaand P. australis plant materials (Table 2), and hence, a large quan-tity of S. alterniflora residuals entering the soil would enrich the15N value of S. alterniflora soil. Another possible explanation wasthat the substantial S. alterniflora residuals input to the soil mightincrease the N turnover rate that causes labile N loss through N min-eralization (Schade et al., 2001). The fast N loss rate and the high Nlevel in S. alterniflora soil would explain the increase of 15N. Addi-tionally, the 15N values increased from free LF to iPOM to mSOM inS. alterniflora soil (Table 3), reflecting an increasing degree of SOMdecomposition (Liao et al., 2006; Cheng et al., 2011). The 15N val-ues increases because the decay of most organic materials (besideswood) follows a rise in aliphaticity, and a rise in aliphaticity fol-lows 15N enrichment (Kramer et al., 2003; Wagai et al., 2009). This result was supported by our finding that the C:N ratios declinedfrom free LF to iPOM to mSOM in S. alterniflora soil (Fig. 5), whichis consistent with previous studies that found that a declining C:Nratio in SOM fractions is closely related to increasing SOM decom-position and humification (John et al., 2005; Marin-Spiotta et al.,2009; Wagai et al., 2009).Finally, it is generally acknowledged that the C and N pools inSOM in a coastal salt marsh of eastern China (i.e., JYWNNRRB) wereregulated not only by S. alterniflora invasion, but also by semidiur-nal tidal (Zhou et al., 2009). Dissolved organic C and N of tidal waterprobably input to the salt marshes and influenced organic C and Ncontent in S. alterniflora soil (Cheng et al., 2008). Gebrehiwet et al.(2008) have reported that the increased soil organic C and N in S.alterniflora salt marsh was partly owing to the contribution of phy-toplankton. The increased C and N in SOM of S. alterniflora soil mayresult from a joint contribution of terrestrial and marine organicmatters. A further study is necessary to precisely quantify thepotential contribution of other sources except for S. alterniflora toSOM. Nevertheless, this study demonstrate that 10-year S. alterni-flora invasion significantly impacts on SOM dynamics by alteringsoil organic C and N sequestration, stabilization and turnover.5. ConclusionsIn summary, 10-year S. alterniflora invasion significantlyenhanced whole soil organic C and N contents in comparison tobare flat, S. salsa and P. australis communities by primarily accumu-lating organic C and N contents in mSOM and iPOM of S. alterniflorasoil. Higher proportion of C allocated in iPOM and lower proportionof C allocated in mSOM were found in S. alterniflora soil comparedto S. salsa and/or P. australis soils, leading to lower physical SOCstabilization in S. alterniflora soil. The proportion of S. alterniflora-derived C in free LF and iPOM was significantly higher than thatin mSOM of S. alterniflora soil. The highest S. alterniflora-derived Ccontent was found in iPOM of S. alterniflora soil. The most enriched15N values were found in S. alterniflora soil, which probably dueto the high S. alterniflora residuals input and the fast N loss rate inS. alterniflora soil. Increased 15N values and decreased C:N ratiosfrom free LF to iPOM to mSOM in S. alterniflora soil imply a ris-ing degree of humification. Our results suggested that short-termS. alterniflora invasion could alter soil C and N physical distributionand C turnover in SOM and its fractions, and ultimately affect soilorganic C and N pools sizes and stability in a coastal salt marsh ofeastern China. This highlighted the evidence that plant invasion canpotentially affect ecosystem processes and functions (Mack et al.,2000; Ehrenfeld, 2003), especially the sequestration of soil organicC and N pools.
