xabstract
Benthic macroinvertebrate abundance, taxonomic
composition, and surface flooding dynamics were compared
among high and low elevation stands of narrow-leaved
cattail (Typha angustifolia) and invasive common reed
(Phragmites australis) at Iona Island Marsh, an oligohaline
wetland, and Piermont Marsh, a mesohaline wetland, within
the Hudson River National Estuarine Research Reserve
during 1999 and 2000. Overall, the benthic macroinvertebrate
community at both sites was similar in composition
and abundance to those documented from other low-salinity
systems. Macroinvertebrate taxa richness was lowest in
mesohaline common reed, but similar among common reed
and cattail habitats in oligohaline wetlands. Total macroinvertebrate
densities were greater at high-elevation compared
to low-elevation reed stands at the mesohaline site
during summer 1999 and spring 2000. Total macroinvertebrate
densities were similar among both oligohaline vegetation
types during all seasons, except for spring 2000, when
lower densities were observed in low-elevation common
reed. A weak positive relationship between macroinvertebrate
density and depth of flooding suggests that surface
hydrology may be influencing the observed patterns of
macroinvertebrate density among the vegetation stands.
These results suggest that benthic macroinvertebrate abundance
and diversity may not necessarily be impaired in lowsalinity
wetlands experiencing invasion by common reed
unless the change in vegetation is accompanied by a
measurable alteration to physical conditions on the marsh
surface (i.e., elevation and flooding dynamics).

xintroduction
Invertebrate communities of tidal freshwater and lowsalinity
wetlands have received little attention from estuarine
ecologists. Odum (1988) observed that “Historically,
tidal freshwater environments have been ignored by limnologists
because of the presence of oceanic tidal influence,
and neglected by marine ecologists because they are bathed
in freshwater and inhabited primarily by freshwater organisms.”
The majority of previous studies of invertebrate
communities in low-salinity tidal ecosystems have focused
primarily on benthic communities of tidal rivers. In the tidal
freshwater James River Estuary, Virginia, Diaz (1978, 1989,
1994) found no single species specifically adapted for existence
in low-salinity estuarine conditions. Tidal freshwater
macroinvertebrate communities are comprised of species
that are broadly adaptable to changing conditions and remarkably
resilient to environmental perturbations and pollutants.
In comparison to nontidal freshwater portions of the
estuary, low-salinity marshes are low in benthic species
richness (Swarth and Kiviat 2009; Yozzo and Diaz 1999).
Ettinger (1982) reported on tidal freshwater benthic communities
of the Schuylkill River, Philadelphia, PA, USA. He
supported the general contention of Diaz (1978) and attributed
an observed lack of faunal diversity in the Schuylkill to
a lack of habitat diversity.
Tidal freshwater and oligohaline wetlands represent a
gradual transition from the salt marshes of the lower estuary
to the nontidal freshwater conditions upstream. Organisms
that are unable to adapt to varying tidal conditions are
excluded. Many freshwater invertebrate taxa common in
low-gradient rivers and streams, however, are likely to be
encountered in tidal freshwater wetlands, and many euryhaline
estuarine invertebrate taxa make their way up into tidal
fresh and oligohaline waters (Odum 1988). A welldocumented
shift from a benthic community dominated by
polychaetes and marine crustaceans to one dominated by
oligochaetes and insect larvae occurs when moving from
euhaline to low-salinity estuarine habitats (Barendregt et al.
2009). Many of the important invertebrate taxa present in
low-salinity wetlands are cosmopolitan in their distribution;
for example, the oligochate genus Limnodrilus, the amphipod
genus Gammarus, the bivalve genus Pisidium, hydrobiid
snails, and many ostracod genera are abundant within
low-salinity estuarine habitats along the USA. Atlantic coast
and in western Europe (Barendregt et al. 2009; Diaz 1978;
Yozzo and Steineck 1994). Environmental factors regulating
the abundance and distribution of benthic macroinvertebrates
in low-salinity wetlands include density of emergent
vegetation, litter quality, flooding frequency and duration,
sediment texture, and foraging activity by natant macrofauna
(Odum and Heywood 1978; Wenner and Beatty
1988; Yozzo and Smith 1995).
Common reed (Phragmites australis), an invasive clonal
wetland plant becoming increasingly prevalent within tidal
marshes of the Northeast USA over the last century, can
displace a variety of salt and brackish marsh plant species
(Orson et al. 1987; Chambers et al. 1999, 2002). The change
in vegetation community structure associated with expansion
of common reed has both positive and negative effects
on habitat use by avian and mammalian fauna (Marks et al.
1994; Benoit and Askins 1999; Chambers et al. 1999).
Changes in hydrogeomorphology (intertidal elevation and
creek density) following common reed invasion have led to
speculation that access by marsh resident nekton [e.g. mummichog
(Fundulus heteroclitus) and dagger-blade grass
shrimp (Palaemonetes pugio)] within common reed may
be diminished (Weinstein and Balletto 1999; Meyer et al.
2001). Fell et al. (1998) found that the composition of
mummichog diets differed between common reed and salt
marsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora) marsh surfaces in
Connecticut, but the amount of consumed biomass was
similar. Raichel et al. (2003) documented a greater frequency
of large mummichog prey (amphipods and gastropods) in
common reed marshes in comparison to cordgrass marshes
in southern New Jersey. Angradi et al. (2001) reported
greater macroinvertebrate density in cordgrass stands compared
to adjacent reed stands in a southern New Jersey
brackish marsh.
Benthic macroinvertebrate density and species composition
on the marsh surface could undergo changes as the area
of high intertidal habitat increases and the frequency of
flooding decreases in response to common reed expansion.
It is unclear, however, if benthic macroinvertebrate densities
change in proportion to a reduction in both flooding depth
and duration within common reed stands. Furthermore, variable
common reed expansion rates across the estuarine
salinity gradient (Chambers et al. 1999; Warren et al.
2001) translate into vegetation stands of varying size
(Winogrond and Kiviat 1997; Warren et al. 2001; Lathrop
et al. 2003) and flooding regimes (Windham and Lathrop
1999). The elucidation of changes in flooding, as well as the
spatial distribution and densities of individual macroinvertebrate
species within common reed stands, is required to
accurately predict changes in habitat quality when common
reed expansion alters the intertidal marsh landscape within
low-salinity systems.
The objective of this study was to quantify benthic macroinvertebrate
density and species composition within common
reed and narrow-leaved cattail (Typha angustifolia)
stands of two low-salinity systems and determine the influence
of vegetation type and marsh surface flooding on
benthic macroinvertebrate community characteristics. We
hypothesized that, in comparison to native vegetation
stands, common reed would exhibit a reduction in benthic
macroinvertebrate density and diversity and community
structure would also deviate from that normally observed
in other low-salinity tidal systems for both our study sites.
These investigations were a subset of a larger study to
determine the role of common reed invasion on tidal
marsh—open water trophic linkages in the Hudson River
Estuary, which included estimation of habitat use by resident
and transient nekton, and characterization of hydrogeomorphic
variables (Osgood et al. 2006).

xmethods
This study was conducted at the Iona Island and Piermont
Marsh components of the Hudson River National Estuarine
Research Reserve. Iona Island Marsh, located on the western
shore of the Hudson River 63 km north of the Battery
(the southern tip of Manhattan Island), encompasses a
225 ha area of oligohaline intertidal marsh and upland
habitat. Vegetation cover within the marsh portion of the
Iona Island complex includes a mix of ∼70 % common reed
and ∼30 % cattail. Broadleaf emergent plants [e.g., pickerelweed
(Pontedaria cordata) and arrow-arum (Peltandra
virginica)] are also present, but comprise a minor component
of the vegetation community. Common reed has been
expanding in Iona Island Marsh since the mid-1960s
(Winogrond and Kiviat 1997). Piermont Marsh is a 400 ha
tidal mesohaline marsh (5–10 psu) located along the west
shoreline of the Hudson River, 37 km north of the Battery,
and 26 km south of Iona Island. Piermont Marsh was invaded
by common reed between 1790 and 1858. Common
reed stands increased to cover almost 65 % of the total
marsh area by 1991, converting many mixed cattail and reed
communities to mono-specific reed stands (Winogrond and
Kiviat 1997). Native, noninvasive vegetation at Piermont
marsh is restricted to the interior sections of the marsh and
does not flood except during extreme spring tides.
At Iona Island Marsh, a total of 12 sampling locations were
established within cattail and common reed stands as follows:
Within both vegetation types, three sampling locations each
were situated at high and low elevations as predetermined
through a topographic survey. Average difference between
high and low elevation sites was 11.5 cm. All sampling
locations were situated within 20 m of a tidal creek (Fig. 1).
At Piermont Marsh, six sampling locations were established
within common reed. Three sampling locations each
were positioned at high and low elevations as predetermined
through a topographic survey. All locations were situated at
random distances along one side of a 100-m long section of
tidal creek (Fig. 1). Average elevation difference between
high and low stations was ∼4 cm. All sampling locations
were within 20 m of the creek.
Benthic macroinvertebrate densities were measured from a
total of 864 benthic cores collected in June, August, and
October of 1999 and 2000. Eight replicate 7.62-cm diameter
cores were collected to a depth of 10 cm at each sampling
location during each of the three months. Cores were sieved
in the field onto a 0.5-mm mesh sieve and preserved in 5 %
neutral formalin with Rose Bengal stain. In the laboratory,
samples were rinsed gently onto a 0.5-mm mesh sieve and
sorted. Macroinvertebrates sorted from samples were identified
to the lowest possible identification level, a regional
voucher collection was prepared, and representative specimens
were stored in 70 % ethyl alcohol solution.

To verify flooding differences as a function of elevation,
marsh surface inundation (depth, duration, and frequency)
was continuously measured from June to October 1999 and
May to October 2000 using wells instrumented with data
loggers and pressure transducer units. Three wells were
located at each sampling location for a total of six wells at
Piermont Marsh and 12 wells at Iona Island Marsh. Wells
were constructed of 7.6 cm PVC pipe and slotted (commercial
well screen with 0.325 mm slots) over the entire subsurface
length (50 cm). Readings, recorded every 24 min,
were converted to water table position by calibrating with
measurements of actual water table level in the wells
(Osgood 2000). Resolution of water level measurements,
after adjusting for surveyed heights of the wells, was within
1.3 cm. Flooding depth was reported as the average maximum
depth/tidal cycle each month. Flooding duration was
reported as the average number of hours the marsh was
inundated per tidal cycle each month, and flooding frequency
was reported as the percentage of total tidal cycles that
flooded the marsh surface monthly.
Macroinvertebrate taxa richness and density were compared
among high and low elevations and vegetation type. All
macroinvertebrate data were log(y+1) transformed to meet
normality assumptions and analyzed using a one-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA); post-hoc comparison of means
was conducted using the Student–Newman–Keuls test.
Shannon’s diversity index (H′) was calculated and compared
among sampling locations and collection dates (Shannon
and Weaver 1949).
The Kruskal–Wallis Z test using a Bonferroni correction
was necessary to analyze for differences in flooding depth and
duration, as these variables did not meet the assumptions of
normal distribution. Differences in mean flooding frequency
were analyzed using ANOVA. Hydrologic data were pooled
over the entire sampling period in any given year for the
purpose of analyzing for spatial differences in flooding.
Mean flooding depth and duration were compared with benthos
density and species richness using the average value of
the three wells adjacent to any given sampling location. The
average flooding depth for the 2-week period bracketing each
benthic collection was regressed against the average benthos
density and species richness for any given date.

xresults
A total of 6,665 individuals representing 70 macroinvertebrate
taxawas collected among the six sampling locations at the two
marsh sites. The most abundant taxa at Iona Island during
1999 were dipteran larvae (primarily Ceratopogonidae and
Chironomidae) and naidid oligochaetes, followed by gastropods
(primarily Hydrobiidae), fingernail clams (Pisidium sp.),
potworms (Enchytraeidae), and lumbriculid oligochaetes.
During 2000, the most abundant taxa at Iona Island Marsh
were naidid oligochaetes, dipteran larvae (primarily
Ceratopogonidae, Chironomidae, Dolichopodidae,
Limoniidae, and Tipulidae), fingernail clams, lumbriculid oligochaetes,
and gastropods (primarily Hydrobiidae) (Table 1).
The most abundant taxa at Piermont Marsh during 1999
were naidid oligochaetes, followed by potworms, dipteran
larvae (primarily Chironomidae and Dolichopodidae), the
polychaete Manyunkia speciosa, springtails (Collembola),
isopods (primarily Ligidium sp.), gastropods (primarily
Hydrobiidae), and flatworms (Nemertea). During 2000, the
most abundant taxa at Piermont Marsh were naidid
oligochaetes, followed by potworms, dipteran larvae (primarily
Chironomidae, Dolichopodidae, and Tipulidae), M.
speciosa, gastropods (primarily Hydrobiidae), and springtails
(Table 1).
Taxa richness among individual sampling stations at Iona
Island Marsh (high- and low-elevation cattail; high- and
low-elevation common reed) ranged from 10 to 21 taxa
(mean of 17) in 1999 and from 5 to 23 (mean of 15) in
2000 (Table 2). Taxa richness among high- and lowelevation
common reed stations at Piermont Marsh ranged
from 8 to 17 in 1999 (mean of 11) and from 10 to 22 (mean
of 16) in 2000. Overall, average taxa richness was greater at
Iona Island Marsh in comparison to Piermont Marsh.
Taxonomic composition/richness was similar among vegetation
treatments and seasons at Iona Island Marsh in 1999.
However, in 2000, significantly lower taxa richness was
observed in high-elevation cattail in June and in highelevation
common reed in August. Taxa richness was similar
among vegetation types at Iona Island Marsh in October
2000. Significantly greater taxa richness was observed in
high-elevation common reed (in comparison to lowelevation
common reed) at Piermont Marsh in June 1999,
August 1999, August 2000, and October 2000 (Fig. 2).
Values for Shannon’s diversity index (H′) were similar
between the two study years at Iona Island Marsh (Table 2).
Although average values were similar between the two
marshes and between both study years, there was considerable
variation among individual vegetation/elevation plots
and among month (June, August, and October) within the
individual plots. The most and least diverse vegetation
elevation assemblages at Iona Island Marsh were October
1999 high common reed and October 1999 low cattail,
respectively. The most and least diverse vegetation/elevation
assemblages at Piermont Marsh were October 2000
high common reed and August 2000 low common reed,
respectively (Table 2).
Total macroinvertebrate density did not vary significantly
among vegetation types at Iona Island Marsh in 1999. In
June 2000, total macroinvertebrate density was significantly
lower in low-elevation common reed stands. No significant
differences in total macroinvertebrate densities were observed
at Iona Island Marsh in August or October 2000.
Total macroinvertebrate density was significantly greater at
high-elevation common reed in comparison to low-elevation
reed at Piermont Marsh in August 1999 and June 2000
(Fig. 3). This observed seasonal variation may be related
to microtopography (seasonal ponding of rain and tidal
floodwaters) in high marsh areas.
Average flooding depth and duration over the entire study
period (both years combined) revealed a significantly higher
flooding depth at the low elevation station in bothmarshes and
both vegetation types (Fig. 4). Flooding duration and frequency
were also significantly different between elevations at Iona
Island Marsh, but did not differ with elevation at Piermont
Marsh. Flooding depth, duration, and frequency were similar
between common reed and cattail stands for the same elevations
at Iona Island Marsh. There was a positive relationship
between macroinvertebrate density and flooding depth when
all vegetation and elevation plots were combined across both
sites (Fig. 5). A single outlier point on this regression plot is
noted and represents an observation of particularly high average
macroinvertebrate density in the low-elevation cattail
community at Iona Island Marsh in October 1999. All other
regression analyses were insignificant (P>0.05).

xdiscussion
Benthic macroinvertebrate communities were characterized
by moderate to high abundance, with a variety of taxonomic
groups represented in the assemblage. General patterns of
community dominance and diversity were consistent across
the two salinity regimes and between years. Previous studies
of benthic macroinvertebrate communities in low-salinity
estuarine habitats document similar composition and
abundance as those observed at the Iona Island and
Piermont marshes (Barendregt et al. 2009; Diaz et al.
1978). For example, dipterans and naidid oligochaetes are
numerically dominant within both salinity regimes, while
mollusks (along with dipterans and naidid oliochaetes) dominate
in low salinity. However, most previous studies have
focused on the shallow subtidal or nonvegetated lower intertidal
zones; few (e.g., Diaz et al. 1978) provide insight to
the composition of benthic macroinvertebrate communities
in densely vegetated intertidal wetlands.
Density of benthic macroinvertebrates (mostly oligochaetes
and gastropod mollusks) was twice as high in
common reed stands at Iona Island Marsh in comparison
to adjacent cattail stands and reed stands at Piermont Marsh.
Common reed stands at Iona Island Marsh may support
higher invertebrate density because of a more favorable
habitat (e.g., flooding regime or food availability).
Alternatively, nekton, foraging within common reed habitat,
may not exert the same control over invertebrate density as
in other stands. Flooding depth was positively correlated
with invertebrate density and low elevation common reed
stands showed a trend toward greater flooding than all other
stands. This result suggests that invertebrate density may be
controlled more directly by flooding than by the indirect
result of predation which should be greater in association
with greater flooding depth (i.e., more access to the marsh
for foraging by fish).
The intertidal marsh surface is used as spawning and
nursery habitat for a variety of estuarine and marshresident
nekton (Rozas and Odum 1987; Yozzo and
Smith 1998). Benthic invertebrate prey resources on
the intertidal marsh surface and the shallow subtidal
benthos of marsh creeks may contribute substantially
to maintaining the nursery function of low-salinity estuarine
wetlands (McIvor and Odum 1988). Resident fish
and macrocrustaceans were distributed evenly across
common reed and cattail marsh surfaces at Iona Island
and Piermont marshes when they experienced comparable
flooding regimes (Osgood et al. 2006). Throughout
the 2-year study period, the resident nekton communities
at both sites were dominated by mummichogs and
grass shrimp (Table 3). Other information from these
sites supports the idea that nekton foraging activity may
be lower within the common reed stands (Osgood et al.
2006); mean nekton densities were not significantly
different between common reed and cattail stands at
Iona Island Marsh; however, mean nekton density within
common reed stands at Piermont was significantly
lower in comparison to either reed or cattail stands at
Iona Island. Significantly more juvenile mummichogs
(18–35 mm TL) were collected within cattail in comparison
to common reed at Iona Island Marsh, suggesting
that spawning success of this species, and therefore
foraging pressure from this size class, may be lower in
common reed (Osgood et al. 2006).
The difference in flooding regime among vegetation
stands in these low-salinity marshes could account for
some of the observed patterns within the benthic invertebrate
community. The observed patterns of tidal flooding
at Iona Island Marsh and Piermont Marsh may
result from the comparative age of the reed stands.
The stands at Piermont Marsh have less topographic
relief (and flood less frequently) than the stands at
Iona Island (Osgood et al. 2006). Frequency of flooding
within common reed stands at Iona Island is similar to
that reported for reed stands in other oligohaline systems
(Warren et al. 2001), suggesting that flooding
differences between common reed and noninvasive, native
vegetation stands may be less extreme in lowsalinity
marshes where common reed can withstand a
longer duration of flooding in comparison to highsalinity
marshes (Chambers et al. 2002).
In previous studies, benthic macroinvertebrate densities
in common reed stands and noninvasive, native tidal marsh
vegetation have been shown to be similar (Fell et al. 1998,
2003) and not related to hydroperiod (Warren et al. 2001).
Angradi et al. (2001) documented lower macroinvertebrate
density in common reed than in salt marsh cordgrass during
the months of August and October in a Southern New Jersey
salt marsh. Both vegetation communities studied were characterized
by similar tidal flooding regimes. Lower density in
common reed was attributed to increased predation resulting
from lower stem density. Lower taxa richness among common
reed was attributed to lack of microhabitats (pools and
hummocks) in this euhaline system that otherwise may
increase diversity among benthic macroinvertebrates. In
contrast, Robert and Matta (1984) attributed seasonal fluctuations
in the benthic macroinvertebrate community of an
irregularly flooded salt marsh in Virginia to variation in life
cycles of the numerically dominant taxa and the drying and
flooding of the high marsh surface.
Low-salinity estuarine wetlands are highly productive,
transitional ecosystems, which combine functional,
structural, and faunal characteristics of salt marshes
and nontidal, freshwater wetlands. They occur on all
three coasts of the USA; however, the vast majority of
information about invertebrates in tidal freshwater or
low-salinity wetlands is derived from study sites in the
northeast and Mid-Atlantic region. The invertebrate fauna
of tidal freshwater wetlands is comprised of mostly
freshwater species, although a few euryhaline estuarine
species are apparently able to colonize these transitional
wetland environments.
The Hudson River studies described herein revealed that
regularly flooded common reed stands in oligohaline and
mesohaline tidal wetlands of the Hudson River Estuary
support abundant and diverse macroinvertebrate communities
and that taxa richness/diversity and density are similar
between invasive and native vegetation stands. Greater
flooding depth, in both cattail and common reed stands,
may support increased benthic macroinvertebrate density.
The influence of foraging access and/or vegetation type
may not be as important as the direct influence of flooding
depth on invertebrate density. Invertebrate communities in
low-salinity estuarine wetlands are resilient and able to
withstand both natural and anthropogenic environmental
perturbations. Understanding the composition and functional
role of these communities will benefit estuarine conservation
and restoration efforts and may contribute to the
development of ecologically sound performance indicators
and success criteria for tidal freshwater and low-salinity
wetland restoration projects.