xabstract
Invasion of Spartina alterniflora in coastal areas of China increased methane (CH4) emissions.
To elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we measured CH4 production potential, methanogen
community structure and biogeochemical factors along a coastal wetland transect comprised of five
habitat regions: open water, bare tidal flat, invasive S. alterniflora marsh and native Suaeda salsa and
Phragmites australis marshes. CH4 production potential in S. alterniflora marsh was 10 times higher
than that in other regions, and it was significantly correlated with soil organic carbon, dissolved
organic carbon and trimethylamine concentrations, but was not correlated with acetate or formate
concentrations. Although the diversity of methanogens was lowest in S. alterniflora marsh, invasion
increased methanogen abundance by 3.48-fold, compared with native S. salsa and P. australis marshes
due to increase of facultative Methanosarcinaceae rather than acetotrophic and hydrogenotrophic
methanogens. Ordination analyses suggested that trimethylamine was the primary factor regulating
shift in methanogen community structure. Addition of trimethylamine increased CH4 production rates
by 1255-fold but only by 5.61- and 11.4-fold for acetate and H2/CO2, respectively. S. alterniflora invasion
elevated concentration of non-competitive trimethylamine, and shifted methanogen community
from acetotrophic to facultative methanogens, which together facilitated increased CH4 production
potential.
 
xintroduction
Climate change and exotic plant invasions are major environmental changes that threaten the sustainability of
global ecosystems1. Invasive plant species can alter biodiversity and stability of ecosystems worldwide2 and are
increasingly expensive to control3. Furthermore, it is predicted that climate change and invasive plants can interact
synergistically4. Climate change is expected to increase the risk of plant invasions through ecosystem disturbance
and via the enhanced competitiveness of invasive species under elevated CO2 levels, and increased global temperatures,
precipitation, and nutrient availability1. Meanwhile, invasive plants can participate in feedback loops that
affect climate change by regulating the sequestration and stabilization of soil organic carbon (SOC) and greenhouse
gas emissions1,5,6.
CO2 emissions from soils change in response to plant invasions7, while microbial-mediated atmospheric
non-CO2 trace gases are also affected by invasive plants5,8. For example, plant invasions enhance soil N2O emissions
by increasing the abundance and changing the composition of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, thus, increasing
nitrification5,9. In contrast, the response of CH4 emissions to plant invasions remains unclear. Cheng et al.10 and
Zhang et al.8 found that the invasion of Spartina alterniflora to Chinaís coastal salt marshes significantly stimulated
CH4 emissions compared with pristine areas containing native Suaeda salsa and Phragmites australis. The
invasion of the European P. australis haplotype to the east coast of the United States, however, did not affect CH4
emissions compared with areas containing native S. alterniflora11. Differences in belowground biomass or SOC
storage in invaded ecosystems are thought to cause this discrepancy in CH4 emissions between marshes in China
and North America10,11. Methanogenesis is the terminal step in the anaerobic decomposition of organic matter. Hence, the rate and
pathway of methanogenesis reflect the community structure of methanogenic archaea because different species of
methanogens exhibit different kinetics and different responses to environmental conditions12,13. For example, Liu
et al.14 reported that CH4 production potential increased as the dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration
gradient increased following a shift of dominant methanogens from acetotrophic Methanosaetaceae to hydrogenotrophic
Methanobacteriales in freshwater wetlands. Godin et al.13 also found that CH4 emissions were greater in
the Methanomicrobiales-dominated, nutrient-rich fens than in the Methanosaetaceae-dominated, nutrient-poor
fens in Canada.
Methanogen community structure in wetlands is affected by environmental factors such as vegetation types15,
temperature16, water table17, pH18 and the presence of favorable electron acceptors19. Hence, shifts of the dominant
plant species in wetlands can directly or indirectly influence the abundance and community structure of methanogens
by providing substrates through root exudates, root debris and litters15. This process is more severe with
invasive plants as they are often more efficient at acquiring and using resources and, consequently, exhibit a higher
net primary productivity and biomass than do native plants20. Additionally, invasive plants exhibit distinct litter
chemistries compared with native species, which may have disproportionate impacts on CH4 production and the
community structure of methanogens21. Therefore, information about the community structure and activity of
methanogens is essential to better understand the process by which plant invasions alter environmental conditions,
change the availability of substrates and ultimately affect CH4 emissions in invaded ecosystems.
S. alterniflora is a C4 plant native to the Atlantic and Gulf coastal marshes of North America that was intentionally
introduced to China in 1979 to control coastal erosion and stabilize sediment22. By 2007, this species had
spread by replacing native species over an area of 34,451 ha23, constituting 3.54% of coastal wetlands in China24.
Previous studies have shown that S. alterniflora invasions considerably increase SOC storage6, levels of nitrogen25
and sulfur26, and the overall rates of nutrient cycling in soil27. All such changes can potentially affect CH4 production
either by increasing the substrates for methanogens or by increasing sulfates and other preferred electron
acceptors in the invaded salt marshes19,21. In this study, we examined the methanogen community structure and
CH4 product potential of five coastal marsh habitats (each containing invasive S. alterniflora, native S. salsa and P.
australis, unvegetated bare tidal flat and open water sediments) to address the following three questions: (1) does
the S. alterniflora invasion alter methanogen community structure; (2) which factors induce changes in methanogen
community structure; and (3) do shifts in methanogen community structure alter CH4 product potential?
  
xmethods  
Study site. The coastal salt marsh of the Yancheng National Nature Reserve (33∞22' N, 120∞42' E), Yancheng
city, Jiangsu Province, China (Fig. S1) has a warm temperate climate, with a mean annual air temperature of
12.6 ∞C and a mean annual precipitation of 1040 mm. Tides in this region are semidiurnal with an amplitude of
2ñ3 m and seawater salinity is 30.0ñ32.0%. S. alterniflora was intentionally introduced to this site in 1982 from the
United States to control coastal erosion22. Since then it has rapidly spread and gradually replaced native P. australis
and S. salsa, resulting in a substantial shift in plant zonation across the marsh landscape. Coastal wetlands in the
area are composed of five regions: open water, tidal mudflat, S. alterniflora, S. salsa and P. australis. Open water
is exposed only during extreme low tides or full moon events. The bare tidal flat and the S. alterniflora marsh are
located on the lower and middle regions of the intertidal zone, respectively, and are inundated semidiurnally. The
S. salsa marsh occurs in the irregularly flooded high intertidal zone and is inundated only when the tidal level is
higher than the mean high water spring tide. The P. australis marsh is located in the rarely flooded supralittoral
zone and is inundated only after the occurrence of storms and heavy rainfall events. An experimental area spanning
each of the five regions was mapped with a surveyorís transit and laser rangefinder, and a spatially planimetric
map of the site was prepared using the SurferÆ 1253.
Sampling and analyses. Plant and soil samples were collected on 22 September 2012. The S. alterniflora
site was selected where S. alterniflora replaced S. salsa in 2002. Three 50 cm2 or 25 m2 sampling quadrats were
randomly established in each region. Plants in each of the smaller quadrats were clipped at the soil surface. Plants
were washed carefully with distilled water and oven-dried at 70 ∞C for measurement of aboveground biomass. Soil
samples (0ñ20 cm) were collected at ten different positions in each of the larger quadrats using a stainless steel
soil sampler (2.5 cm diameter). All soil samples were stored in a cool box and transported to the laboratory for
analysis. Soil subsamples for DNA analysis were stored at - 20 ∞C for DNA extraction. A subsample (~200 g) was
also air dried for analysis of soil properties. The concentrations of SOC and total N (TN) were determined via the wet oxidation redox titration method
and the micro-Kjeldahl method, respectively. The dissolved organic and inorganic components of fresh soils
were extracted by deionized water using a (oven-dried) soil to water ratio of 1:2 (w/v) for 30 min under agitation
at 200 rpm in a flask, and then centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 25 min at 4 ∞C. The supernatant was immediately
acidified with 2 mL 2.0 M HCl and filtered through a 0.45-µ m membrane filter (Whatman, Clifton, NJ, USA). A
100 mL subsample of the extract was frozen for amine analysis21. Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the extracts
was analyzed on a Shimadzu C analyzer (TOC Vcph, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Acetate and formate were determined
by high-performance liquid chromatography (LC-2010HT, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) fitted with a Shodex
RS-Pak KC-811 column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and an ultraviolet-visible spectrum detector
(SPD-20A/20AV, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Sulfate (SO4
2-) was analyzed using a DX-120 ion chromatography
(Dionex, Camberley, UK). Methylated amines were concentrated to approximately 7ñ8 mL from 100 mL of acidified
extracts by diffusion at 55 ∞C for 24 h. An aliquot (6 mL) of concentrated extract was pipetted into a 10 mL
vial and supplemented with 2 g NaCl. Vials were sealed with Teflon-faced septa before injection of 0.5 mL of
10 M NaOH. The analysis of methylated amines was performed by injecting a 1.0 mL headspace sample into a gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) system that consisted of a helium CP 3800 GCs (Varian, Darmstadt,
Germany) in combination with a Saturn 2200 MS (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany). The injector, detector, and transfer
line were set at 120 ∞C, 250 ∞C, and 280 ∞C, respectively. The column temperature was initially held at 35 ∞C for
3 min, then increased at a rate of 35 ∞C min-1 to 120 ∞C and maintained at this temperature for 2 min to remove
volatile or semi-volatile interference before the next injection. The flow rate of the helium carrier gas was set at
1 mL min-1 using the splitless mode. Electron impact mode at 70 eV was used, and quantification of amines was
performed under the selected ion monitoring mode41.
Measurement of CH4 production potential. The CH4 production potential of wetland soils was
determined using the method of Galand et al.54 with slight modification. Briefly, 10 g of the fresh soil samples
(oven-dried) were added to a 100 mL incubation jar and the ratio of soil to water was modified with artificial
seawater to 1:2. The artificial seawater consisted of 20 g of NaCl, 4.26 g of Na2SO4, 3 g of MgCl2∑2H2O, 0.2 g
of CaCl2∑2H2O, 0.2 g of KH2PO4 and 0.5 g of KCl per liter. The solution was buffered at pH 7.2 with 10 mM
3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid. The artificial seawater was autoclaved and deoxygenated with N2.
Immediately prior to dispensing, NaHCO3 was added to a concentration of 10 mM, Na2S was added to a concentration
of 300 mM and resazurin was added to a concentration of 1 mg l-1 47. The anoxic artificial seawater was
then dispensed into jars and the contents thoroughly mixed to form sludge. The jars were sealed with butyl rubber
septa, evacuated with a vacuum pump, and back flushed with high purity N2 using an atmospheric pressure
balance. The evacuation/backflush procedure was repeated three times to obtain completely anoxic conditions.
After that, a stimulation experiment with four treatment conditions (no additions, H2/CO2 added by removing
22.4 mL of headspace N2 and injecting 22.4 mL H2/CO2 mixture (80/20%), 10 mM sodium acetate added, or
4.44 mM trimethylamine added) was conducted in the dark at 25 ∞C for 240 h. All four treatments were performed
in triplicate. During the incubation, CH4 concentrations in the headspace were measured daily by sampling the
headspace of the jars with a syringe. These gas samples were analyzed by gas chromatography (GC12A, Shimadzu,
Kyoto, Japan). CH4 production potential was calculated from the slope of the linear regression given by the CH4
concentration increase over time.
DNA extraction and PCR amplification. The total DNA of composite soil samples obtained from each
plot was extracted with the FastDNA SPIN Kit (Bio 101, Vista, Carlsbad, CA, USA), according to the manufacturerís
instructions55. The 16S rRNA gene was chosen as a molecular marker to study methanogen community structure56.
The primer pair 1106F (5' -TTW AGT CAG GCA ACG AGC-3' ) and 1378R (5' -TGT GCA AGG AGC
AGG GAC-3' ) was used for PCR amplification. A GC clamp (5' -CGC CCG CGC GCG GCG GGC GGG GCG
GGG GCA CGG GGG G-3' ) was added to the forward primer to enable denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(DGGE) analysis. The 25 µ L PCR reaction mixture consisted of 12.5 µ L Premix Taq version 2.0 (TaKaRa, Dalian,
China), 0.25 µ L of each primer (50 pmol), 1 µ L of 5-fold diluted DNA template and 11 µ L sterilized distilled water.
The reaction was initiated by denaturing at 94 ∞C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 94 ∞C for 30 s,
annealing at 55 ∞C for 30 s and extension at 72 ∞C for 90 s, with a final extension at 72 ∞C for 5 min.
Real-time PCR was carried out using the primer pair 1106F/1378R to quantify the abundance of methanogen
16S rRNA genes in soils using a LightCycler ST300, LightCycler Software Version 3.5 (Roche Diagnostics,
Germany) and SYBR Premix Ex Taq (TaKaRa, Dalian, China). Each reaction mixture (25 µ L) consisted of 12.5 µ L
1 ◊ SYBR Premix Ex Taq, 0.25 µ L of each primer, 1 µ L of DNA template diluted 5-fold, and sterilized distilled
water. The real-time PCR program was initiated by a denaturing step at 95 ∞C for 10 min, followed by 35 cycles
of denaturing at 95 ∞C for 10 s, annealing at 57 ∞C for 10 s, and extension at 72 ∞C for 6 s. A standard curve based
on known methanogens 16S rRNA gene copy numbers (1.97 - 19.7 ◊ 108 copies µ L-1) was generated using the
purified PCR product.
Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. DGGE was performed using a Dcode Universal Mutation
Detection System (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), according to the manufacturerís instructions. PCR
products (8 µ L) were loaded on gels containing 8% (w/v) polyacrylamide, 1 ◊ TAE buffer and linear gradients of
45% to 70% denaturant (100% denaturant consisted of 7 M urea and 40% (v/v) formamide). Electrophoresis was
performed at 60 ∞C and 20 V for 10 min, followed by 70 V for 18 h. Gels were stained with SYBR Green ? (1:10,000
dilution; Biowhittaker Molecular Applications, Rockland, ME, USA) for 30 min, rinsed with dilution TAE buffer,
and photographed under UV illumination with Polaroid Type 665 positive/negative film. All samples (three replicates)
for each comparison were run on the same gel. The position and intensities of individual bands on the
DGGE profiles was determined using Quantity One 4.4 gel documentation software (BioRad). DGGE profiles of methanogen communities were analyzed by subtracting the background fluorescence from each lane. Band intensities
were normalized to the total intensity of all bands in a given lane, resulting in relative band intensities15. This
value indicated the relative abundance of each group under the defined PCR conditions57.
Cloning, sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. The nucleotide sequences of the DNA fragments that
were recovered from the bands on DGGE gels were determined as follows. First, the positions of bands were manually
marked with Adobe Photoshop 7.0. Next, the bands were excised with a sterile scalpel and transferred to a
1.5 mL Eppendorf tube with 20 µ L of sterilized distilled water and stored overnight at 4 ∞C. The eluate was then
used as template for PCR re-amplification under the conditions previously described using a primer pair without
a GC clamp (1106F/1378R). Re-amplified products were cloned and ligated into the pEasy-T3 cloning vector
(TaKaRa), according to the manufacturerís instructions and then sequenced with an ABI 3730 DNA Automatic
Sequencer using Big Dye-terminator cycle sequencing chemistry (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA). Phylogenetic
relationships among the obtained sequences were determined using the BLAST search program on the NCBI
web site (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). This information was used to construct neighbor-joining trees, using Poisson
correction distances, pairwise deletion of gaps and missing data. Bootstrapping (500 replicate reconstructions)
was used to estimate the reliability of the tree reconstructions, using MEGA 4.058. The obtained 16S rRNA gene
nucleotide sequences have been deposited in the GenBank database (accession numbers: KP420447 ? KP420474).
Diversity of methanogens and statistical analysis. The Shannon-Weaver diversity index (Hí) was used
to determine the variation of methanogen diversity across the marsh transect:
 = - ( )
=
H p ln p
i
s
i i
1
where pi is the proportion of the ith band intensity in all bands in the same lane and s is the total number of bands.
The following community ordination analyses were also conducted using relative band intensity data: a principal
component analysis (PCA) and redundancy analysis (RDA) conducted using Canoco for Windows 4.5
(Microcomputer Power, Ithaca, NY, USA). The dissimilarity of the methanogen communities by PCA among
different regions was tested with Wilcoxon signed-rank test using the first principal component scores59. For RDA
ordinations, biplot scaling was used by focusing on inter-sample distances. Environmental variables considered
in these ordination analyses included SOC, TN, DOC, acetate, formate, sulfate and trimethylamine and plant
aboveground biomass. A stepwise forward selection method was used to choose variables for inclusion in the final
model and a Monte Carlo test with unrestricted permutations was used to determine the significance of the environmental
variables in accounting for community structure data60.
We divided the 16S rRNA genes affiliated to methanogens into three groups based on sequencing results and the
metabolic pathways for methanogenesis: hydrogenotrophic, acetotrophic and facultative. The proportion of each
group of the total abundance of methanogens was calculated according to the relative band intensities. Statistical
analyses were conducted using SPSS 11.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago IL, USA) unless otherwise stated. All data were
expressed on the basis of oven-dried soil and were evaluated for normality. If necessary, values were log-transformed
prior to statistical analyses. Statistically significant differences in soil and vegetation properties and methanogen
community structure characteristics amongst regions were assessed by a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Regression analyses were used to test the significance of statistical associations between methanogenic substrates
and SOC, and between CH4 production potential and soil properties or methanogen community characteristics.
Spearmanís non-parametric rank correlation was used to describe the associations between the abundance of
methanogens and the various soil characteristics. The fit of the linear equations was evaluated by the coefficient of
determination, R2, and its statistical significance was determined by Fisherís F test. The significance of the regression
coefficients was tested by Studentís t-test.
xresults 
Plant aboveground biomass and soil characteristics. The aboveground biomass of S. alterniflora was
significantly higher (1.70 kg m-2) than those of P. australis (0.79 kg m-2) and S. salsa (0.41 kg m-2; Table 1). SOC
concentration was 1.50ñ9.21 times higher in the S. alterniflora marsh region than in any of the other four regions,
while the two unvegetated regions had the lowest SOC concentrations. DOC concentration in S. alterniflora
marsh was 1.07 g C kg-1, 2.36ñ6.19 times higher than in the other regions. Soil salinity in the coastal salt marsh
varied from 3.16ñ16.1â. Sulfate concentration, meanwhile, varied from 0.25ñ1.22 g SO4
2- kg-1 and was greatest
in the S. alterniflora marsh, followed by the open water sediments, bare tidal flat, S. salsa marsh, and P. australis
marsh. Trimethylamine concentration in the S. alterniflora marsh was 2.34ñ18.4 times higher than in the other
regions, while acetate concentration was highest in the P. australis marsh. Both trimethylamine and acetate concentrations
were lowest in the unvegetated regions. Mean formate concentration was highest in the S. alterniflora
and S. salsa marshes, though the differences among the five regions were not significant. SOC was significantly
correlated with DOC (R2 = 0.931, P = 0.008, n = 5) and trimethylamine (R2 = 0.922, P = 0.009, n = 5) but not
correlated with acetate (R2 = 0.262, P = 0.378, n = 5) or formate concentration (R2 = 0.302, P = 0.338, n = 5).
Abundance and community structure of methanogens. The abundance of methanogens as estimated
by real-time PCR varied from 0.26 ◊ 108 to 3.56 ◊ 108 copies g-1 d.w.s (gram dry weight soil) in the five regions
of the transect (Table 2). Methanogen abundance in the S. alterniflora marsh was approximately an order of
magnitude greater than in the two unvegetated regions and between 83.9% and 105% greater than in the P. australis
and S. salsa marshes. When data from the five regions were combined, the abundance of methanogens was significantly correlated with SOC, TN, DOC and trimethylamine, but not correlated with soil salinity, sulfate,
acetate or formate concentrations (Table S1).
In the DGGE examination of the archaea 16S rRNA genes, a total of 28 bands were observed in samples from
the five transect regions (between 14 and 19 bands per region; Fig. 1). The mobility and intensity of the DGGE
bands differed among regions. In the open water sediments and the bare tidal flat, the bands with strongest intensity
tended to be concentrated at the top of the gel (bands 2, 4, 5 and 7 in Fig. 1). In contrast, the most intense bands
migrated to the bottom of the gel in S. alterniflora and S. salsa marshes (bands 13, 17, and 18 for S. alterniflora
marsh and bands 13 and 17 for S. salsa marsh; Fig. 1). Bands 8, 11, 13, 15 and 17 were dominant in P. australis
marsh (Fig. 1). The differences in the mobility and intensity of the DGGE bands were reflected in methanogen
diversity. The Hí value showed that the unvegetated regions had higher methanogen 16S rRNA diversity than did
the vegetated regions (Table 2). The lowest methanogen diversity was observed in the S. alterniflora marsh, though
this was not significantly lower than that observed in the S. salsa and P. australis marshes (Table 2). Log-Hí values
were negatively correlated with SOC and showed a tendency to be negatively correlated with acetate concentration
(P < 0.10), but were not correlated with DOC, trimethylamine or formate concentrations.
In total, 28 bands were sequenced, from which we identified members of Methanomicrobiales,
Methanobacteriales, Methanosaetaceae, Methanosarcinaceae and Halobacteriaceae (Fig. S2). The abundance of
hydrogenotrophic Methanomicrobiales and Methanobacteriales was highest in the P. australis marsh (Table 2). The S. alterniflora marsh contained the greatest abundance of acetotrophic Methanosaetaceae: 0.17ñ8.29 times higher
than that of the other regions (Table 2). In the P. australis marsh, the open water and the bare tidal flat, however, the
dominant methanogens were Methanosaetaceae. Methanogens belonging to Methanosarcinaceae were detected in
all the regions with the largest abundance observed in the vegetated regions. In the S. alterniflora marsh, the abundance
of Methanosarcinaceae was 2.30ñ56.6 times higher than in the other regions. Consequently, the S. alterniflora
marsh had the highest relative abundance of Methanosarcinaceae across the transect. Methanosarcinaceae were
also the dominant methanogens in the S. salsa marsh.
The first ordination axes of the PCA analysis explained 51.5% of the community data (Fig. 2a). These results
revealed that the two unvegetated regions had very similar methanogen communities that differed significantly
from those of the vegetated regions. Methanogen communities also differed significantly amongst the three vegetated
regions, primarily as result of differences in Bands 4, 5, 8 and 10 (Methanosaetaceae) and bands 9, 13, 16 and
17 (Methanosaetaceae and Methanosarcinaceae). The results of the RDA ordination analysis revealed that RDA
axes 1 was significantly correlated with trimethylamine concentration (R2 = 0.799, P = 0.041, n = 5) and marginally
correlated with SOC (R2 = 0.742, P = 0.061, n = 5) and DOC (R2 = 0.726, P = 0.067, n = 5; Fig. 2b). No significant
relationship was observed between RDA axes 1 and sulfate, formate or acetate concentrations. Both the abundance
and relative abundance of Methanosarcinaceae were significantly correlated with trimethylamine concentration
(Table 3 and Fig. 3). In addition, the relative abundances of acetotrophic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens were
logarithmically and negatively correlated with trimethylamine (Table 3).
Response of CH4 production potential to substrates addition. The average of CH4 production
potential in the salt marsh ranged from 1.95 to 20.8 µ g CH4 kg-1 d-1, with the highest CH4 production potential
occurring in the S. alterniflora marsh and the lowest in the unvegetated regions (Fig. 4). CH4 production potential
in the P. australis marsh was significantly greater (7.14 µ g CH4 kg-1 d-1) than in the S. salsa marsh (5.09 µ g CH4kg-1 d-1). When data from the five regions were combined, CH4 production potential was significantly correlated
with SOC, DOC and trimethylamine concentrations and marginally correlated with sulfate concentration, but
not with acetate or formate concentrations (Table 3). An exponential relationship was observed between CH4
production potential and the ratio of trimethylamine to sulfate (Table 3). Regression analysis showed that CH4
production potential tended to decrease with an increase in Hí and was significantly correlated with both the
abundance of methanogens and the relative abundance of facultative rather than acetotrophic or hydrogenotrophic
methanogens (Table 3).
Large differences in the responses of CH4 production rate to substrate additions were observed between regions
and between substrate types (Fig. 4). The addition of acetate, H2/CO2 and trimethylamine only slightly increased
CH4 production in the unvegetated regions, but significantly stimulated CH4 production in the vegetated regions
(Fig. 4). The addition of trimethylamine produced a stronger effect than did the addition of acetate and H2/CO2 in
the vegetated regions. In the S. alterniflora marsh, the addition of acetate induced a 5.61-fold increase in methanogenesis,
while the addition of H2/CO2 induced a 11.4-fold increase, and the addition of trimethylamine induced a
1255-fold increase (Fig. 4). When the data from the five regions were combined, the (log) CH4 production rates of
the acetate, H2/CO2 and trimethylamine treatments were all significantly correlated with the (log) abundance of
acetotrophic, hydrogenotrophic, and facultative methanogens (Fig. 5). The CH4 production rate of the trimethylamine
treatment was significantly correlated with the relative abundance of facultative methanogens but negatively
correlated with the relative abundance of acetotrophic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens.
xdiscussion
The invasion of exotic S. alterniflora to the coastal marsh significantly increased CH4 production potential by
192ñ967% above that recorded in the non-invaded regions. This finding is consistent with previous in situ measurements
at a S. alterniflora-invaded site showing a 57.4ñ505% increase in CH4 emissions in coastal areas of
China28. These findings are likely due to S. alterniflora having a higher plant biomass and stem density than does
the native P. australis10. CH4 production in wetland ecosystems is known to be potentially limited by the availability
of organic Carbon13. Dominant plant species regulate net primary production, litter quantity and chemistry, and
there is a direct species-dependent link between plant production and substrates for CH4 production29. Ding et
al.30 found that plant species regulated the spatial variation of CH4 emissions in a freshwater marsh in the Sanjiang
plain of China. In this study, S. alterniflora had significantly higher aboveground biomass than did S. salsa and
P. australis, resulting in greater accumulation of SOC and DOC in the invaded marsh6. We found that SOC and
DOC accounted for 99.6% and 98.0% of the spatial variation of CH4 production potential among the five regions,
respectively (Table 3). Minamikawa et al.31 similarly demonstrated that differences in CH4 emissions among five
paddy fields were due to variation in SOC concentrations. In contrast, the invasion of European P. australis on the
east coast of the United States did not increase SOC storage, resulting in no apparent differences in CH4 emissions
between invasive P. australis and native S. alterniflora11. Thus, it is likely that the S. alterniflora invasion provided
more substrates for methanogens by accelerating SOC accumulation and subsequently increasing CH4 production.
We report that the 5.94 to 7.13-fold greater concentration of DOC in the S. alterniflora marsh than in the
unvegetated regions produced 9.00ñ9.67 times the magnitude of CH4, indicating that DOC in the S. alterniflora
marsh was more efficiently converted into CH4 than in the unvegetated regions. Strˆm et al.32 found that easily
degradable organic C from fresh plant litter, root debris and exudates was the major source of methanogenic
substrates in peatlands. In bare tidal flats and open water sediments, sand-combined organic C is aged and less
bioavailable33 and contains long-chain n-alkanols34. Thus, it is feasible that the low quantity and quality of DOC
likely suppressed methanogenesis in the unvegetated regions.
We found a significant relationship between CH4 production potential and trimethylamine (other than acetate),
as well as greater CH4 production in response to added trimethylamine than to added H2/CO2 or acetate. These
findings indicate that CH4 production was primarily associated with trimethylamine in the coastal salt marsh.
King35 similarly suggested that acetate was not a significant precursor of CH4 unless sulfate concentrations were
lower than 1 mM. This was because the rate of sulfate reduction was 100 to 1000-fold greater than methanogenesis36.
In this study, as sulfate concentrations in the coastal salt marsh were higher than this threshold value, methanogens
may not use acetate as a substrate. In contrast, ënon-competitiveí substrates such as methanol and methylated compounds
are suggested to be preferentially utilized by methanogens19,37. It has been estimated that between 61% and
90% of the CH4 produced in tidal salt marshes originated from trimethylamine metabolism38,39. S. alterniflora, like
other halophytes, can osmoregulate via the synthesis of proline, glycine betaine and dimethylsulphoniopropionate40.
S. alterniflora releases methylated amines, especially trimethylamine, to salt marsh soils that can act as CH4
precursors during senescing21. We observed that acetate concentration in the fall (when S. alterniflora begins to
senesce) was similar to that recorded in early summer41. However, trimethylamine concentration was approximately
8-fold higher in the fall than in the summer, and accompanied by a 5.93-fold increase in CH4 production potential.
Therefore, we argue that trimethylamine is the key substrate for methanogensis in the S. alterniflora marsh.
S. alterniflora absorbs sulfur from tidewater for growth42 resulting in a significant increase in soil sulfate concentration
(Table 1). In this study, we found that CH4 production potential increased exponentially with the ratio
of trimethylamine to sulfate, indicating that sulfate accumulation suppressed net CH4 emissions in field. Previous
studies have shown that sulfate-reducing bacteria are unable to use trimethylamine43. Thus, we speculate that part
of the CH4 produced was consumed by anaerobic oxidation of CH4 (AOM). Sulfate has been proposed to be the terminal electron acceptor of AOM in marine sediments44, with >90% of CH4 produced in oceanic sediments
estimated to be consumed by sulfate-coupled AOM45. However, whether AOM-regulated CH4 emission occurs in
the coastal salt marsh remains unclear, as aerobic methylotrophs are relatively unimportant in hypersaline environment46.
Buckley et al.47 demonstrated that in the microbial mats of the Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh, AOM
occurred only when CH4 concentrations were sufficient, suggesting a threshold ambient CH4 concentration is
needed for AOM. Thus, it is possible that the S. alterniflora invasion might synchronously increase the capacity of
methanogenesis and AOM, suppressing CH4 emissions from the invaded ecosystem. Further study is required to
better understand the role of AOM in the overall CH4 dynamics in coastal marshes.
Despite very high methanogen abundance in the S. alterniflora marsh (0.84ñ12.6 times greater than in the
other regions), methanogen diversity was low in this region. This indicates that the S. alterniflora invasion fundamentally
altered methanogen communities. We found that the increase in the abundance of methanogens in the
invaded ecosystem was asynchronous among the three methanogenic groups. Acetotrophic Methanosaetaceae,
hydrogenotrophic Methanomicrobiales and Methanobacteriales remained at relatively similar in the invaded S.
alterniflora marsh and the native P. australis or S. salsa marshes. However, in the S. alterniflora marsh, the abundance
of facultative Methanosarcinaceae was almost 250% greater than in the S. salsa and P. australis marshes, such that
Methanosarcinaceae became the dominant methanogens. This is in stark contrast to the unvegetated site where the acetotrophic Methanosaetaceae dominate48. Methanogen communities are suggested to be regulated by the
availability of substrates14. Obligate, high-affinity acetotrophic Methanosaetaceae are described as slow-growing
methanogens, while Methanosarcinaceae are fast-growing with a higher minimum threshold (0.2ñ1.2 mM) than
Methanosaetaceae (7ñ70 µ M) when growing on acetate49. Thus, Methanosarcinaceae generally tend to predominate
over Methanosaetaceae in substrate-rich freshwater wetlands12. For example, Liu et al.14 observed that the dominant
methanogens shifted from Methanosaetaceae to Methanosarcinaceae and then to Methanobacteriales along
an increasing DOC gradient in freshwater wetlands. Peng et al.50 also reported that an increasing abundance of
Methanosaetaceae coincided with a decrease in acetate concentrations to < 200 µ M in rice paddy soil. In this study,
although the S. alterniflora invasion significantly increased acetate concentration compared with the unvegetated
regions, the concentration of acetate in the S. alterniflora marsh remained an order of magnitude lower than the
threshold value of 0.2 mM. Therefore, the change of methanogen community structure in the invaded ecosystem
could not be attributed to the accumulation of acetate. The results of our regression and RDA analyses indicated
that trimethylamine was the primary factor regulating methanogen community structure. Methanosarcinaceae are
metabolically diverse but they are the only methanogen group capable of utilizing methylamines. Besides amines
derived from the decomposition of S. alterniflora, benthic animals and phytoplankton also contain high amine
concentrations and could be sources of amines to salt marshes either by direct release or during decomposition19,21.
Wang and Lee51 demonstrated that trimethylamine consumption is the primary pathway for methanogenesis by
Methanosarcina, Methanococcus and Methanomethylovorans in salt marsh and mangrove sediments.
We observed a significant association between the relative abundance of Methanosarcinaceae and CH4 production
potential or CH4 production rate under the added trimethylamine treatment (see Fig. 5), suggesting that
Methanosarcinaceae play a key role in CH4 production by utilizing trimethylamine in the salt marsh. This suggestion
is further supported by our observation of a greater initial response of methanogenesis to added trimenthylamine
than to added H2/CO2 or acetate in the S. alterniflora marsh. Purdy et al.37 similarly reported that the addition of
trimethylamine induced a rapid proliferation of Methanosarcinales rather than Methanomicrobiales and a pulse of
CH4 emission from sediments in a British estuarine ecosystem. Parkes et al.19 demonstrated that the turnover rate
of trimethylamine to CH4 was 2ñ4 orders of magnitude greater than that from either acetate or bicarbonate in the
Methanosarcinales-dominated surface sediment of British salt marshes. Interestingly, in this study, the addition of
acetate and H2/CO2 did stimulate CH4 production in the vegetated regions even when sulfate concentration in the
overlying water was 30 mM. In contrast, despite harboring the highest relative abundance of Methanosaetaceae, the
response of CH4 production to the added acetate treatment in the unvegetated regions was much lower than that
observed in the vegetated regions. Senior et al.52 suggested that the ësulfate-depletedí microzones could be structured
at vegetated sites due to a large reduction in sulfate. The presence of plant issue and debris may supply labile organic
substrates and promote sulfate reduction exceeding the rate of sulfate replenishment. In this way, acetotrophic and
hydrogenotrophic methanogens can survive and sustain methanogenesis activities in microzones35. In contrast,
in the bare tidal flat and open water sediments, the lack of substrates and suitable microzones would result in the
proliferation and activity of acetotrophic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens at low levels.
In summary, the invasion of exotic S. alterniflora to this coastal marsh ecosystem significantly increased CH4
production potentials by 192ñ968% above that observed regions with native species and in unvegetated regions.
S. alterniflora significantly increased the supply of ënon-competitiveí substrate trimethylamine for methanogens,
which in turn stimulated the proliferation of facultative Methanosarcinaceae rather than acetotrophic and hydrogenotrophic
methanogens. This resulted in a shift of the dominant methanogens from acetotrophic to facultative. Thus,
we conclude that the increase of CH4 production under the S. alterniflora invasion was the result of an increase in
the ënon-competitiveí trimethylamine and a shift in methanogen community structure.