xabstract
In Mexico, as in many other subtropical and tropical countries, there has been a recent trend towards stocking
non-native carp (Cyprinus carpio) in lakes and ponds as a source of food in rural areas. However, the results of
a study in a series of small (1–8 ha), shallow (<2 m), semi-natural ponds in Acambay, a high altitude valley in
the basin of the Lerma river in the volcanic belt in central west Mexico, illustrate that the stocking of carp over
a threshold value may have a detrimental ecological impact at several trophic levels. Ponds with carp tended to
be turbid with high levels of suspended solids, and with few rooted macrophytes and epibenthic invertebrates.
In contrast, ponds without carp had clear water and abundant rooted macrophytes and associated invertebrates,
particularly gastropod molluscs. The direct uprooting of macrophytes by benthic foraging carp appeared to be
the most important mechanism in switching the ponds from a clear macrophyte-dominated to a turbid state. The
subtropical study ponds thus appear to confirm the alternative stable-state hypothesis developed in temperate lakes,
although the importance of benthic rather than pelagic interactions was emphasised. The implications of stocking
carp for native fauna of high intrinsic conservation value and as a food supply for local people are outlined.

xintroduction
It is now widely accepted that shallow lakes may exist
in either of two alternative stable states, one dominated
by phytoplankton and the other by submerged
macrophytes, within a range of nutrient concentrations
(Irvine et al., 1989; Scheffer et al., 1993). Each state
is buffered by a variety of mechanisms, even in the
face of an increase or decline in available nutrients
(Moss et al., 1996). Theoretical models and practical
experience of such dynamics are, however, largely
restricted to temperate zones. Subtropical and tropical
lakes, in contrast, are relatively poorly understood.
Due to their higher light availability and temperature,
biological production is intuitively higher in
tropical than in temperate lakes, provided that nutrients
are not limiting. Consequently, minimum phytoplankton
biomass tends to be higher for a given
nutrient status in tropical systems (Lewis, 1990),
although composition or seasonal dynamics do not
appear to differ in any fundamental way between
the two types (Kalff & Watson, 1986; Matveev et
al., 1992). Because of the a protracted growing
season of tropical lakes, submerged macrophytes may
also be expected to achieve higher biomass than in
temperate systems. The higher macrophyte density,
through a variety of mechanisms, may help to buffer
a lake from any impact of an increase in nutrient
loading (see Stansfield et al., 1997). A high primary
productivity of phytoplankton may not be manifested
as a high density of individuals, or even biomass,
of grazing zooplankton (Fernando, 1994) in tropical
lakes, because of predation by characteristically
abundant, productive, and efficient fish stocks
(Gliwicz, 1994).
In temperate shallow lakes, the abundance and
biomass of fish may be instrumental in the ultimate
dominance of phytoplankton or submerged macrophytes,
through two major pathways, either acting
individually or in combination. Firstly, fish may exert
top-down control of zooplankton, which has a positive
potential subsequent impact upon phytoplankton and,
therefore, a negative effect on water clarity (the trophic
cascade-Carpenter et al., 1987). Secondly, there may
be a variety of direct and indirect mechanisms as a
result of benthic foraging by the fish. These include
the re-suspension of suspended solids (Szumiec, 1989;
Breukelaar et al., 1994), promotion of nutrient release
(Tatrai & Istvanovics, 1986; Tatrai et al., 1990; Cline
et al., 1994), and uprooting of macrophytes (Ten
Winkel&Meulemans, 1984). The presence or absence
of submerged macrophytes has a major feedback
effect on fish community structure, especially the ratio
of piscivores to zooplanktivores/benthivores (Bronmark
& Weisner, 1992). The impact of foraging fish
in tropical waters, without a cold season, is predicted
to be more intense than in temperate lakes, although
little quantitative information is as yet available.
The introduction of fish, particularly members
of the Cyprinidae, Cichlidae and Clupeidae, as a
source of protein for human consumption, into tropical
and subtropical lacustrine systems is continuing
apace (Fernando, 1991). Stocking of carp (Cyprinus
carpio) is prevalent in Mexican rural zones, partly as
a result of its high capacity to survive and grow in
poor quality waters (Maitland & Campbell, 1992). It
has long been known that carp may have a dramatic
impact on lake ecology (Cahn, 1929). Introductions of
carp and related species such as goldfish (Carassius
auratus) may have severe negative impacts on native
fauna and flora through changes in water quality and
disturbance or depletion of shared resources in both
temperate (Richardson et al., 1995) and subtropical
systems (Brumley, 1991). The current paper reports
on the first attempt to assess the trophic impacts of
stocking of carp inMexico. The basic approach was to
determine the general pattern of relationships between
biological, chemical, and physical parameters and
carp biomass in a series of ponds in a valley of the
Lerma River. The results of the study are discussed
in the light of the alternative stable state hypothesis
and its application to suptropical rather than temperate shallow lakes.


xmethods
Data were collected from small (0.8–8 ha), shallow
(mean 1 SE = 0.840.21 m) ponds in Acambay
in the Alto Lerma zone on the Mexican volcanic
belt (altitude 2550 m) in central west Mexico (19
570 N, 99 510 E). The region is delimited in the
north by the Acambay-Tixmadeje fault system and
in the south by the Venta de Bravo fault system.
Acambay is in a valley in the basin of the Lerma
river identified as being of conservation value because
of its high density of endemic species. Some of
these, including axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum),
crayfish (Cambarellus montezumae), and long-finned
amarillo (Girardinichthys multiradiatus) (Espinoza et
al., 1993), a small live-bearing fish of the family
Goodeidae, are present in the ponds. Some ponds are
natural but most are artificial, created partly to provide
irrigation for the surrounding agricultural land and the
crops (mainly maize and wheat) it supports. Ponds are
dependent on precipitation (903.8 mm per annum –
García, 1988) in the wet season beginning in June.
The ponds tend to fill in July/August, coinciding with
the heaviest rains. The annual average annual temperature
is 14.2 C (maximum 16.8 C, minimum 10.6 C
– García, 1988). During the sampling season in this
study water temperatures ranged from 8 C at 6.00 in
the morning on the coldest day to 24 C at 13.00 in the
afternoon on the hottest day.
In some ponds juvenile carp are stocked at 3–5
cm in length, often in densities >2 m−2 (above the
governmental recommended stocking level of 0.5–2
m−2), according to availability from the centres of
production, and left to grow for one or two years
(preferably to a minimum of 20 cm) before being
harvested, traditionally around Easter. This coincides
with the peak of the dry season, when the ponds
partially or even totally dry out. The fish crop is
insufficient to be of commercial interest. Relatively
wealthy farmers may allow their workers to harvest
the carp for their own consumption, which they catch
when the water level declines to 20–30 cm, with a
simple mesh bag or by hand. Subsistence farmers
harvest the fish for their own purposes, although a
number of fish are lost to poachers, who may use rifles
to shoot carp where the water is clear. Although native
fauna, including amphibians, fish, and especially crayfish,
is consumed to a greater or lesser extent by local
people, carp is generally welcomed as an additional
source of protein.
A variety of physical, chemical and biological variables
across all trophic levels were quantified from
the twelve study ponds at the onset of the dry season.
Nine ponds were sampled from January to March
1995, and three in February of 1996. Eight ponds
were known to be stocked with carp, whereas four
were thought to be carp-free. Unfortunately, some
of the ponds dried out before data on all variables
could be collected. Physical variables included pond
morphometry (area in ha and mean depth in m), Secchi
depth, and temperature.Water quality parameters were
measured from a pooled sample (of three subsamples)
of 1 litre of water collected around midday in each
pond, according to the standard methods described by
APHA (1985). These included total organic nitrogen
(TON) and ammonia NH3 by the Kjeldahl technique;
nitrate (NO3) by the Brusin Sulphate technique (see
DGN, 1986), and total phosphorus (TP) and orthophosphate
(PO4) by the Stannous chloride method.
The concentration (mg l−1) of total suspended solids
was obtained by the gravimetric method after ignition
to 105 C.
Chlorophyll a concentration was used as an index
of phytoplankton biomass and consequently primary
productivity. This was determined using the fluorometric
method (Lorenzen, 1966) from 50–500 ml
of filtered water from a pooled sample of three
subsamples taken at 10 cm under the water surface.
As an index of macrophyte abundance, cover of rooted
(submerged and emergent) and floating macrophytes
was estimated within a 40 cm diameter circular frame
(Necchi et al., 1995) at 5 sample points along each of
twelve 10 m transects (60 samples per pond in total).
Sampling thus encompassed the zone close to the
littoral margin, where the majority of any macrophytes
occurred. As ponds were generally square, three transects
were taken at equal distances along each side,
originating from, and perpendicular to, the littoral
margin.
Five samples of the entire water column (from 0.5
m to 1.9 m depth and 2–6 litres volume) were taken
with a PVC tube (2 m length, 7 cm diameter) for
zooplankton. The resulting pooled sample was filtered
through a 200  mesh plankton net and stored in
alcohol. In the laboratory the sample was made up
to 200 ml. Five 5 ml subsamples were taken and
the number of cladocerans and copepods in each was
determined.
The abundance (org. m−3) of epibenthic invertebrates
and small native fishes was estimated using a
small beam net (Renfro, 1962) along three transects
of 12 m in length in each pond. The abundance (org.
m−3) of benthic organisms was estimated from a 5 litre
pooled sample of mud taken by means of an Ekman
grab in a variety of locations. Organisms were separated
from the mud in the field by 3 sieves (4 mm, 2
mm and 0.4 mm mesh size) and identified and counted
in the laboratory. An overall estimate of abundance
of the various groups was provided by combining the
estimates obtained by each sampling method.
Two multi-mesh gill-nets of 20 m in length, split
into four panels of 5 m each with 1.27 cm, 5.71 cm,
7.62 cm and 8.9 cm (0.5–3.5 inches) mesh, respectively,
were used to sample carp from 7–40 cm,
covering the entire size range expected in the ponds.
The first net was set at 90 to, and from, whereas the
second was set in a transverse manner to the first in
the middle of the pond. Nets were set in the hours
of daylight for between 6–10 hours. The difference
in the length of time the nets were set was found to
be of little consequence, as subsequent analysis of
catch over the time period showed the bulk of captures
occurred within 4 hours of the net being set. Data were
expressed as catch per unit effort (CPUE) ha−1 by
abundance and biomass.
The Kendall coefficient of concordance (W; Siegel
& Castellan, 1988) was used to test the degree of association
of variables within each of three groups, indicative
of the likely trophic pathways of the impact of
carp. The first group comprised the variables predicted
to respond to an increase in nutrients (Carvalho &
Moss, 1995). The second group consisted of those
variables illustrative of potential top-down control of
zooplankton by young carp (Carpenter et al., 1987).
The third group was composed of those variables
potentially affected by the benthic foraging action of
carp. To indicate potential cause and effect, Spearman
rank correlation coefficient (rs) was used to describe
the relationships between variables obtained from
significant Kendall concordance coefficients (W). The
nature of any significant relationships was then further
qualified by determining the best-fit curve for the data
(SIGMASTAT. Jandel-Scientific, V.1, USA).

xresults
Nutrient concentrations were typically high, with
mean TP of 232 g l−1 and mean TON of 1.7 mg l−1
(Table 1). All ponds were therefore classed as hypereutrophic
(Wetzel, 1983). However, a high nutrient
concentration was not necessarily expressed as a high
biomass of algae. Chlorophyll a concentrations ranged
from 0.31 to 170 g l−1 (Table 1) and appeared not to
be related to the concentration of nutrients (Table 2).
Total macrophyte cover ranged from 4% to
98% divided between rooted (4–54%) and floating
macrophtytes (0–54%; Table 1). The abundance
of rooted macrophytes was significantly positively
related to Secchi depth (which ranged from 5–127
cm; Tables 1 and 2) and accordingly to the concentration
of suspended solids (Table 2). Suspended, mostly
organic, solids were of sufficient concentration (to 188
mg l−1) to bestow a brown coloration in some ponds.
The concentration of suspended solids was significantly
related to the abundance of rooted macrophytes
(Tables 1 and 2).
Populations of benthic and epibenthic organisms
were variable but often relatively high (Table 1), with
the invertebrate orders Malacostraca (the native crayfish
C. montezumae), Insecta, Gastropoda, Lamellibranchia,
Ostracoda, and Turbellaria represented.
Insecta was present in all ponds for which data were
available, Gastropoda in 64% and Malacostraca in
40%, while the rest of the orders appeared only in one
pond.
The density of cladoceran and copepod zooplankton
was low (5–23 individuals l−1). The
potentially zooplanktivorous native G. multiradiatus
occurred in all ponds and reached a high density >4
m−3 (Table 1). The native amphibian A. mexicanum
was only present in one pond and is thus unlikely to
have had a general functional role in the structure of
the trophic web.
Carp had been introduced into eight of the twelve
ponds, although density varied from 0 to 4.8 CPUE
and biomass ranged from 0 to 3623 g CPUE (Table
1). Because of the seasonal nature of the ponds, carp
were generally young and therefore relatively small
(i.e. in pond 6 mean (1 SE) length = 13.31.09 cm,
mean (1 SE) weight = 14546.2 g). However, in
pond 9, carp were much larger (mean (1 SE) length =
44.05.26 cm, mean (1 SE) weight = 2150362 g),
suggesting this pond had retained water for at least two
seasons and, probably as a consequence, had not been
harvested. Carp biomass was related to the benthic
group of variables in the concordance analysis (Table
2), with significant negative correlations between carp
and Secchi depth, rooted macrophytes and epibenthic
organisms (Table 3). These relationships were nonlinear
(Figure 1).


xdiscussion
The partial or even total drying out of some ponds
may have led to fundamental differences in the structure
of the food web, confounding the interpretation
of the impact of carp on the ponds. Ponds retaining
water may have been expected to have more stable
communities of macrophytes and epibenthic invertebrates
and native fish than those subject to water
loss. However, observations suggest that the speed at
which macrophytes and benthos can colonise any pond
was less than two months from the onset of the wet
season. This suggests adaptations on the part of many
of the plants and animals. For example, several of
the macrophyte species may have resistant bulbs and
seeds. Contrary to other studies on temporary ponds
(e.g. Bazzanti et al., 1996), the potential dominance
of less mobile, slow to colonise, groups, such as gastropods,
in the ponds also suggests some resistance to
drying-out.
The live-bearing strategy of the fish G. multiradiatus
may be a specific adaptation to exploit temporary
waterbodies as they become available. This fish is not
thought to be tolerant of drying out, and its ubiquitous
presence in the pond system indicates that the pond
system is readily connected by the temporary streams
that begin to flow at the onset of the wet season.
The resistance of several important components of the
community to drying coupled with the speed of colonisation
of others, and exacerbated by the connection to
temporary streams suggests that the temporary status
of some ponds should not be the dominant factor in
determining pond community structure.
The ready division of the ponds into those that
were clear with a high coverage of rooted macrophytes
and those that were turbid with a low coverage of
rooted macrophytes within a narrow range of nutrient
loading, conforms to the alternative stable state hypothesis
proposed for temperate shallow lakes (Irvine et
al., 1989; Scheffer et al., 1993). The negative exponential
relationships between carp and macrophytes
and Secchi depth is also supportive of the view that
fish may not only have a critical role in determining
the alternative states in subtropical in temperate lakes
(Bronmark & Weisner, 1992; Jeppesen et al., 1997),
but that a threshold value (around a carp CPUE of
1) operates, above which any buffering mechanism
is over-run and the water body rapidly switches from
the clear to the turbid state (see Scheffer et al., 1993).
Although further experimental work is required, there
are also indications of the nature of the fish-induced
mechanisms responsible.
The lack of any relationship between carp and
nutrients and chlorophyll a suggests that carp did
not contribute to the overall nutrient values of the
ponds, and thus to algal production, either through
physiological processes or release through sediments
(Breukelaar et al., 1994; Tatrai & Istvanovics, 1986;
Cline et al., 1994). The hypertrophic nature of the
ponds is somewhat unexpected given their altitude
and seasonal nature. However, Acambay valley is
in a tectonic depression and the base volcanic rock
is some 200 m below the surface and overlain with
soil deposits potentially from the bed of an ancient
lake (Ramirez-Herrera et al., 1994). Consequently,
the area is favoured for agriculture. Evidence that
the general source of nutrients was from run-off
from the surrounding crops is provided by the high
ammonia: nitrate ratio (>10:1) indicating input of
fertilisers (Wetzel, 1983). The high proportion (mean
89.018.7%) of inorganic solids also suggests allochthonous
input of chemicals (Table 1). We therefore
suggest that the ponds would naturally be of significantly
lower nutrient status and therefore most likely
to be dominated by macrophytes rather than phytoplankton
(Scheffer et al., 1993).
Although nutrients appeared to be abundant in the
water, the ponds seem to have a relatively low primary
productivity of algae (mean  SE = 24.0320.94 g
l−1). This pattern may be linked to complex water
chemical interactions at this level, such as changes
in the limited availability of nutrient in a form for
algal uptake. For example, the ratio of PO4:TP varied
from pond to pond (mean  SE = 4.061.04, min.
1.07, max. 9.55) suggesting differences in the P cycle.
However, currently it is unknown whether the concentration
of nutrients in this type of system should be
considered only as an upper limit for chlorophyll a
productivity instead of a defined curve-fit between
nutrients and algae densities (Scheffer, 1998). Additionally,
it is not clear whether this is an effect of an
enhanced rate of cycling in the higher temperatures
of the subtropics and whether carp have some role in
nutrient cycling.
The generally low biomass of algae in the ponds
is intuitively likely to limit the size and structure of
the zooplankton populations. The lack of a significant
concordance correlation between G. multiradiatus,
carp, zooplankton and chlorophyll a (Table 2),
suggests that pelagic interactions were unimportant in
these systems. This is further supported by the presence
of only a few zooplankton in the diet of a small
number carp (n = 100) taken for analysis. There has
been some suggestion that zooplankton populations
are generally of insufficient size or lacking in suitable
structure (i.e. lacking large grazing Cladocerans although
this is debated, Dumont, 1994) in subtropical
and tropical systems to be of importance in promoting
clear water through algal control (Crisman & Beaver,
1990), in contrast with the typical pattern in many
temperate shallow lakes (Perrow et al., 1997).
Concordance analysis and subsequent correlations
with suspended solids, Secchi depth and rooted macrophytes,
suggest that the benthic foraging of carp
(digging pits to 10 cm in depth – Ivlev, 1961),
exploiting what may be an abundant benthic resource,
is responsible for the observed patterns. This is
supported by limited dietary samples, which mainly
consisted of mud, epibenthic algae and benthic fauna.
Values of Secchi depth around 20–30 cm appeared
to be the critical threshold value above which the
production of a high coverage of rooted macrophytes
could occur in the ponds. This in turn appeared to be
dependent on the concentration of suspended solids.
The latter are less strongly related to carp than to
rooted macrophytes. The strong negative relationship
between carp and rooted macrophytes may thus be
more indicative of direct disturbance (Ten Winkel &
Meulemans, 1984; Kolasa & Weber, 1995) than an
indirect effect through shading (see Meijer et al., 1990;
Breukelaar et al., 1994). Once the macrophytes are
lost, the potential for sedimentation of solids may be
dramatically reduced (James & Barko, 1990).
The abundance of epibenthic invertebrates also
declined rapidly for values of CPUE ha−1 of carp
>1 (Figure 1), corresponding with the value at which
macrophytes declined, suggesting an indirect rather
than direct impact of carp upon invertebrates (Tatrai
et al., 1994). Moreover, as there was no relationship
between carp and benthic organisms, which
normally constitute the bulk of the diet (Lammens
& Hoogenboezem, 1991), a strong direct predation
effect seemed unlikely. The proportion of gastropods
in the community, the group intuitively linked to the
abundance of macrophytes, also declined rapidly with
macrophytes, from 60% ( SE 5.4) in ponds with
CPUE ha−1 of carp >1 to 2.1% ( SE 0.4) in ponds
with CPUE ha−1 of carp >1.
This preliminary correlational study results
suggest that the introduction of a non-native
benthivorous fish, carp, to the study ponds, has
provoked a detrimental ecological impact, as
predicted by other studies in both temperate and
subtropical systems (e.g. Cahn, 1929; Szumiec, 1989;
Brumley, 1991; Breukelaar et al., 1994; Richardson
et al., 1995). The effect appeared stronger than
either nutrient enrichment from the surrounding
arable land or partial drying-out for some ponds. On
one hand, the loss of rooted macrophytes, possibly
directly through uprooting during benthic foraging,
is intuitively likely to lead to a decline in biological
diversity (Crowder & Painter, 1991) in the ponds of
this area of high intrinsic conservation, particularly
for endemic fish, amphibians, and reptiles. On the
other, the lack of a detectable impact upon the
native fish (G. multiradiatus) suggests otherwise;
apparently, this native fish is not affected by changes
in the bottom-benthos-macrophyte interactions.
Moreover, as G. multiradiatus are also exploited as
food by local people, at face value, the introduction
of carp represents a net gain in the available food
resource. However, the impact upon other exploitable
natural food resources, such as the native crayfish
(C. montezumae), and other endemic species of
freshwater fish from nearby zones, is also unknown.
As such species are consumed by the poorest people of
the zone, there may also be sociological implications.
The relative costs and benefits of the introductions
of carp clearly depend on a more thorough analysis
of the impact upon native species, exploitable natural
food resources and social consequences, than was
possible in the current study.
The current work has provided a baseline of the
potential for trophic interactions within the ponds
and some insight into the similarities and differences
between subtropical and temperate shallow lakes.
For example, benthic interactions may be dominant
in subtropical and tropical systems. Further, more
detailed experimental work is required to unravel
the interactions within the ponds and ultimately to
determine whether the introduction of carp can be
undertaken in a less detrimental and more sustainable
manner, both in ecological and socio-economic terms.