xabstract
European frogbit (Hydrocharis morsus-ranae L.) is an invasive floating plant that negatively affects
native plants in freshwater ecosystems. We conducted a field mesocosm experiment in Oneida Lake, New York
(USA), to study the effect of frogbit cover on macroinvertebrates and to test the effects of 2 physical control
methods, hand pulling and shading, on macroinvertebrate assemblages. We used HesterñDendy samplers and
Ekman grabs to collect surface/phytophilous and benthic macroinvertebrates. Metrics including density of different
types of organisms, total abundance, taxon richness, and Simpsonís diversity index were compared between
control methods. Frogbit cover had significant positive effects on mollusk density, amphipod density, taxon
richness, and Simpsonís diversity in the HesterñDendy surface samples. Sites with frogbit had significantly fewer
benthic worms and more chironomids (HesterñDendy bottom samples) and possibly higher diversity of benthic
macroinvertebrates (Ekman samples). These data suggested that frogbit had positive effects on surface and phytophilous
macroinvertebrates and may change population density and increase diversity of benthic macroinvertebrates.
Hand pulling and shading did not affect macroinvertebrates except that amphipod density in surface
water was significantly lower in shading sites. Therefore, from the perspective of minimizing effects on the macroinvertebrate
communities in the lakes, hand pulling is preferable over shading for controlling frogbit.

xintroduction
Invasive plants often outcompete native species in aquatic
ecosystems, thereby changing the structure and function
of the invaded plant communities (e.g., Randall and Marinelli
1996, Coombs et al. 2004, Zhu et al. 2006, Zhu and
Georgian 2014). In addition, the estimated annual economic
loss caused by invasive aquatic plants is on the order
of $US10 million, and >$US100 million dollars are
spent on their control each year in the USA (Pimentel et al.
2005).
European frogbit (Hydrocharis morsus-ranae L.) is an
invasive floating aquatic plant in North America and is
often found in calm, shallow areas of freshwater ecosystems
(Roberts et al. 1981). Its small kidney- or heartshaped
leaves (1.5ñ6.5 cm long) have elongated stalks (4ñ
6 cm long) and occur in clumps, forming a bouquet-like
rosette (Catling et al. 2003). European frogbit is an aquatic
perennial that propagates primarily by vegetative means.
It can negatively affect native plants by obstructing light
and may affect animals by displacing food plants and altering
dissolved O2 concentrations (Catling et al. 2003,
Zhu et al. 2008). The species can block navigation channels,
irrigation ditches, and water-intake pipes, and can
reduce aesthetic and recreational value of water bodies,
thereby decreasing tourism and real-estate values (Catling
et al. 2003). Therefore, effective control methods are
needed to manage this invasive plant. However, the specific
effects of frogbit and different control methods on
macroinvertebrates have not been investigated to date.
All control techniques have advantages and disadvantages,
and disadvantages can include adverse environmental
effects (Madsen 1997). For example, physical control
methods, such as water drawdown, may be effective in the
short term but adversely affect native species. Chemical
herbicides may have strong effects on nontargeted species
and could lead to resistance in the targeted plants (Richardson
2008). In previous studies, we tested 2 physical
methods to control this speciesóhand pulling and shading
with shade cloth. Shading effectively removed frogbit
(Zhu et al. 2014), whereas hand pulling was effective only
with frequent action (BZ, unpublished data). Shading may
be a feasible choice for controlling frogbit because it grows
in sheltered areas where few recreational activities occur,
and the method is relatively time and cost efficient (Zhu
et al. 2014). Shading requires only preparation, placement and retrieval of shade cloth, and the shade cloth is inexpensive
and available commercially. It works best for monotypic,
or nearly monotypic, stands of frogbit, which are
often found in the natural aquatic ecosystems. However,
how implementation of the 2 control methods affect the
ecosystem remains unclear.
Our objectives were to: 1) investigate the effects of frogbit
on macroinvertebrates, and 2) assess the effects of hand
pulling and shading on macroinvertebrate communities.
We hypothesized that macroinvertebrate communities in
sites without plants would differ from communities in or
under frogbit beds. We also hypothesized that macroinvertebrate
communities in or under frogbit beds would
change after plant control was applied and that the changes
would depend on the control method. We focused on macroinvertebrates
because they are standard bioindicators
for water quality and ecosystem health (e.g., Weigel et al.
2002, Lencioni et al. 2012). Benthic macroinvertebrates
live in the upper layers of sediments and are good indicators
of water quality because they remain in areas suitable
for their survival and differ in their tolerance to water
conditions (Covich et al. 1999, Lencioni et al. 2012). Abundance
and richness of sediment- and plants-associated
macroinvertebrates typically are greater among aquatic
plants than in unvegetated habitats (Feldman 2001). However,
Zhu et al. (2008) observed significantly reduced dissolved
O2 (DO) levels under high-density beds of frogbit
in Oneida Lake. Therefore, we expected that benthic macroinvertebrate
diversity would be reduced because of decreased
DO but that the density of some surface and phytophilous
taxa might increase in the presence of frogbit
because of more food or habitat. We also expected that
hand pulling and shading to remove frogbit would negatively
affect surface and phytophilous organisms and that
the effect of control measures on benthic invertebrates
would depend on the control method. We predicted that
hand pulling would benefit benthic invertebrates because
of increased light and DO, whereas shading would reduce
benthic macroinvertebrate diversity because of decreased
light and DO
  
xmethods  
Study site and experiment design
Oneida Lake is the largest inland lake in New York
State, with a surface area of 207 km2, a mean depth of
6.8 m, and a maximum depth of 16 m (Mills et al. 1978).
Frogbit occurs in the northwestern bays of the lake, and
density has reached 500 plantlets/m2 (Zhu et al. 2008).
We established 12 experimental plots in a small channel
at the Big Bay of Oneida Lake (lat 43.25∞N, long 76.11∞W;
Fig. 1A, B) to conduct our field mesocosm experiments.
Experimental plots were defined with 1- ◊ 1-m polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) pipe squares set floating on the surface,
anchored with concrete blocks to the bottom of the lake,
and labeled and kept afloat with buoys. Water depth in
each plot was <1.5 m, and all plots were in areas protected
from wind and waves and with minimal boat traffic.
Bottom substrate was largely a mixture of fine sediments
and decaying plant matter, with an abundance of
woody debris and submerged macrophytes, and with emergent
(mostly arrowhead Sagittaria sagittifolia) and floating
plants (frogbit) near the shoreline. Vegetation was relatively
evenly distributed along the shoreline and, therefore,
should have affected macroinvertebrates similarly in all experimental
plots. Current in the channel was very slow to
nonexistent, and the channel was wide enough that it was
mostly exposed to the sun, with little canopy cover from
shoreline vegetation. Given the similar experimental conditions
in this small experimental area (Fig. 1B), we assumed
the benthic macroinvertebrate community in the channel
was relatively homogenous (e.g., Gotelli and Colwell 2001).
We randomly assigned 9 experimental plots to 1 of 3
treatments (untreated, hand pulling, and shading) and selected
3 additional plots without frogbit (plants-absent).
The plants-absent sites were fairly open, with sparse vegetation,
and were situated closer to the middle of the channel
than the frogbit plots (all sites closer to shore had
frogbit). We maintained the plants-absent sites by removing
all floating European frogbit that drifted into those
sites at the same time that we removed frogbit from the
hand-pulled sites. We compared the plants-absent sites
with sites covered by frogbit (a space-for-time approach) to address whether frogbit invasion affects macroinvertebrate
communities. Untreated, hand pulling, and shading
sites had similar frogbit cover (80ñ90%) at the beginning
of the experiment. Untreated sites were covered with
frogbit and were not subjected to either control method.
We manually removed all frogbit monthly at hand pulling
sites, and we covered shading sites with 100% shade cloth
(i.e., no light penetration; International Greenhouse Company,
Georgetown, Illinois). We initiated hand pulling and
shading control methods on 15 June 2009 and continued
until 9 October 2009.
Macroinvertebrate sampling and identification
We assessed differences between the macroinvertebrate
assemblages in areas with and without frogbit and effects
of hand pulling and shading on the macroinvertebrate
community by comparing density of each invertebrate
group, total abundance, taxon richness, and Simpsonís
diversity index (Findlay et al. 1989) among the 4 treatments:
plants-absent (no established frogbit), untreated (established
frogbit, no control method), hand pulling, and
shading.
We used 2 methods, HesterñDendy samplers and Ekman
grabs, to collect macroinvertebrates to ensure that
we included as many organisms as possible. The Hesterñ
Dendy samplers consisted of eight 7.5- ◊ 7.5-cm Masonite
plates, spaced 0.94 cm apart (CDPR 2005, Valenty and
Fisher 2012). We set 2 HesterñDendy samplers in each
plot. One was suspended just below the waterís surface
on a string tied as tautly as possible across the PVC-pipe
site markers to collect surface and phytophilous macroinvertebrates,
while the other rested on the bottom of the
lake to collect benthic invertebrates. We obtained Hesterñ
Dendy samples every 2 wk. Weather permitting, we set the
samplers at the beginning of a 2-wk period, allowed them
to collect invertebrates for 1 wk, retrieved and analyzed
them, and stored them for 1 wk before resetting them. The
final HesterñDendy samples represented a longer sampling
period because of inclement weather. HesterñDendy
samplers were in the lake from 23 to 29 June, 6 to 13 July,
21 to 27 July, 4 to 11 August, and 20 September to 9 October.
We did not set samplers on 19 August or 3 September
because of weather conditions. When we collected
HesterñDendy samplers, we took care to keep the samplers
in the water until they were contained in bags to
prevent invertebrates from leaving the sampler when it
was lifted from the water. We avoided collecting vegetation
with the samplers. Samplers were returned to a laboratory
in sealed plastic bags and frozen or refrigerated,
depending on expected time to analysis. Analysis of the
HesterñDendy samplers was done by dismantling each sampler,
gently scrubbing all debris and invertebrates from the
plates with finger tips in a tray of water, then collecting the
invertebrates for identification and storage. Two samples
(hand pulling 1 surface from 4 to 11 August and plantsabsent
1 bottom from 20 September to 9 October) were
lost.
We used an Ekman grab (mouth area 15.2 ◊ 15.2 cm) to
collect benthic invertebrates (Blomqvist 1990) from each
plot on 15 June prior to the start of the experiment and
20 September near the end of the experiment. We returned
the Ekman grab samples to the laboratory in plastic
bags, where they were frozen until they could be analyzed.
Samples were processed by thawing samples, removing
macrophytes or woody debris, and picking through small
portions of the sample with forceps in a dissecting tray
until whole samples were analyzed. We subsampled 2 particularly
large samples collected on 15 June (shading 2
and untreated 3). We subsampled shading 2 by cutting the
frozen sample in half vertically, such that portions of the
top and bottom of the sample remained in the subsample.
This method retained all substrate types, such as macro-phytes and benthic sediment, in the subsample. We subsampled
untreated 3 by thawing the sample, thoroughly
mixing it in a large tray, manually separating the sample
into 2 equal halves, and randomly selecting Ω to analyze.
In each case of subsampling, the subsample was 50% of
the total sample. The density of macroinvertebrates was
multiplied by 2 for analysis and comparisons.
Macroinvertebrates were identified with the keys provided
by Peckarsky et al. (1990). After all macroinvertebrates
were identified, we categorized them into 6 types
for analysis: mollusks, worms, amphipods, isopods, chironomids,
and all other insects. Mollusks were identified
to family (mussels and limpets) or class (all snails with
coiled shells). Worms were identified as oligochaetes leeches, or flatworms. Insects and crustaceans were identified
to family, whereas all aquatic mites were identified
simply as Acari. The few hydras that were collected were
identified as such, and 3 frog tadpoles in one Ekman sample
were identified as tadpoles. We then categorized these
organisms into 4 groups: amphipods included all of the
family Gammaridae, isopods included all of the family
Asellidae, chironomids included the family Chironomidae,
and other insects included the orders Ephemeroptera,
Odonata, Hemiptera, Megaloptera, Coleoptera, Trichoptera,
Lepidoptera, and Diptera (except Chironomidae) because
of their low abundance. We recorded total abundance
as the sum of densities of all invertebrate groups
together. Taxon richness was measured based on the lowest
taxonomic resolution used to identify organisms, and
Simpsonís diversity index was calculated based on taxon
richness and density of each taxon (e.g., Findlay et al. 1989,
Zhu et al. 2006).
Potential limitations of study methods
We worked in a system (floating plants) with inherent
challenges related to sampling strategies and study design.
For example, plots colonized by native plants might
have provided a better comparison than open water when
considering effects of plant removal on phytophilous invertebrates
(e.g., Strayer et al. 2003). However, removal of
frogbit yields open-water habitat rather than habitat occupied
by other vegetation, so we chose to use an openwater
control. HesterñDendy and Ekman grab samples
tend to undersample free-swimming large insects because
they may be able to avoid the samplers or are unlikely to
colonize them (Findlay et al. 1989, Covich et al. 1999,
Valenty and Fisher 2012). Thus, the absence of taxa from
samples could reflect their habitat or behavioral preferences,
life-history traits, or phenologies. However, our
sampling methods enabled us to sample organisms likely
to inhabit both benthic and epiphytic habitat efficiently.
Moreover, the surrounding vegetation (mostly emergent
arrowhead and floating European frogbit) and environmental
conditions (such as water depth, water flow, and
light exposure) were similar among sites, so collection
bias should have been similar among sites, enabling us to
make valid comparisons based on the organisms we did
collect. Therefore, the conclusions drawn from our results
should be valid.
Data analysis
We tested the effects of frogbit cover on macroinvertebrates
by comparing the HesterñDendy samples and the
Ekman grab samples between plants-absent and untreated
sites. We analyzed the HesterñDendy samples first with
paired t-tests to identify differences between surface and
bottom samples. We cleaned each HesterñDendy sampler
of organisms before redeploying it, so we treated each time
period as an independent test of the macroinvertebrates
present in each treatment. We compared the density of
each type of organism (6 categories), total abundance, taxon
richness, and Simpsonís diversity index between untreated
and plants-absent treatments with a 2-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with treatments and time as categorical
variables (Kuehl 2000).
We tested the effects of hand pulling and shading on
macroinvertebrates by comparing density of different invertebrate
types, total abundance, taxon richness, and Simpsonís
diversity index between hand pulling sites and shading
sites with the untreated sites with a 2-way ANOVA
followed by Least Significant Different (LSD) post hoc tests
with treatments (untreated, hand pulling, and shading) and
time as categorical variables (Kuehl 2000). We used the
same analytical approach with the Ekman grab samples.
We conducted all statistical analyses with SPSS (version
21; IBM, Armonk, New York). All data were ln(x + 1)-
transformed to reduce heteroscedasticity (Kuehl 2000).
We considered results significant at a = 0.05.
xresults 
Effects of control methods on frogbit mass
No plants were present in the plants-absent sites, and
% cover was similar among sites in all other treatments at the beginning of the experiment. Thus, initial biomass
of frogbit was similar in the untreated, hand pulling, and
shading sites. We ended the field experiment when European
frogbit started to decay at the end of growing season.
The dry biomass in different treatments revealed that
control methods varied in their success. Frogbit dry mass
was 0.5 ± 0.5 g/m2 (SE) in the plants-absent sites, 4.5 ±
1.5 g/m2 in the untreated sites, 2.5 ± 1.8 g/m2 in the hand
pulling sites, and 0 (no plants found) in the shading sites.
Effects of frogbit cover on macroinvertebrates
Macroinvertebrates collected from surface and bottom
HesterñDendy samplers differed markedly under natural
conditions (plants-absent and untreated sites), particularly
with respect to amphipod density, isopod density,
and total abundance of all types of organisms. Total abundance
was 1.6◊ higher in surface than bottom samples
(t = 2.502, df = 29, p = 0.018). Amphipod density was
higher (t = 3.839, df = 29, p = 0.001) and isopod density
was lower (t = ñ2.114, df = 29, p = 0.043) in surface than
bottom samples. Therefore, we analyzed surface and bottom
data separately.
In surface samples, amphipod density was lower and
mollusk density was higher in untreated than in plantsabsent
sites (Table 1, Fig. 2A). Total abundance of macroinvertebrates
did not differ between plants-absent and
untreated sites (Fig. 2A), but taxon richness (F = 6.564,
df = 1, p = 0.019, Fig. 2B) and Simpsonís diversity (F =
16.457, df = 1, p = 0.001, Fig. 2C) were higher in untreated
than plants-absent sites. Amphipod density, iso-pod density, density of other organisms, total abundance,
and taxon richness also differed among sampling dates
(all p < 0.05; Table 1). Total abundance and taxon richness
were lower on 11 August than on all other dates. The
treatment ◊ time interaction did not affect any response
variable except density of other organisms (Table 1). In
bottom samples, fewer worms but more chironomids were
found in untreated than in plants-absent sites (Table 1,
Fig. 3A, B). Simpsonís diversity varied significantly over
time (F = 3.571, df = 4, p = 0.024). The treatment ◊ time
interaction did not affect any response variable (Table 1).
In Ekman grab samples, densities, total abundance,
taxon richness, and Simpsonís diversity did not differ between
untreated and plants-absent sites (Table 1, Fig. 4A,
B). However, total abundance (Fig. 4A), taxon richness,
and Simpsonís diversity (Fig. 4B) tended to be greater in
untreated than plants-absent sites, particularly at the beginning
of the experiment. For example, on 15 June, taxon
richness (F = 3.846, df = 1, p = 0.121) and Simpsonís diversity
(F = 0.991, df = 1, p = 0.376) in untreated sites were
13.3 ± 3.4 and 3.3 ± 0.7, respectively, whereas these indices
were 3.7 ± 0.3 and 2.4 ± 0.6, respectively, in plants-absent
sites. The treatment ◊ time interaction did not affect any
response variable (Table 1).
Effects of control methods on macroinvertebrates
Treatment (untreated, hand pulling, and shading) did
not affect total abundance, taxon richness, Simpsonís diversity,
or densities except for amphipods (Table 2, Fig. 5AñC)
in HesterñDendy surface samples. Amphipod density near
the surface was lower in shading than in untreated and
hand pulling sites (F = 5.02, df = 2, p = 0.013, Fig. 5A).
Macroinvertebrate communities differed among sampling
dates (Table 2). Total abundance was lower in August than
in the other sampling months, regardless of treatment
(Fig. 5A). Amphipods dominated the invertebrate community
on early sampling dates and were less abundant in October,
whereas isopod density increased from June through
October (Fig. 5A).
Treatment did not affect macroinvertebrates in Hesterñ
Dendy bottom samples or Ekman grab samples (Table 2,
Fig. 6A, B). Macroinvertebrate communities, as represented
by HesterñDendy bottom samples did not differ
among sampling dates, but amphipod density and total
abundance in Ekman grab samples were lower near the
end than at the beginning of the experiment (Table 2,
Fig. 6A). The treatment ◊ time interaction did not affect
any benthic response variable (Table 2).
xdiscussion
Shading completely removed frogbit, whereas monthly
hand pulling only partially reduced frogbit (2.5 g/m2 in
hand pulling sites vs 4.5 g/m2 in untreated sites at the end
of the experiment). In our present experiment, plantsabsent
sites contained a few frogbit at the end because of
invasion of plants from surrounding areas. In another experiment,
we found that 70% light reduction was needed
to remove frogbit (Zhu et al. 2014) and that biweekly hand
pulling was sufficient to reduce European frogbit biomass
nearly 150-fold (BZ, unpublished data).
Effects of frogbit
Consistent with our prediction for surface and phytophilous
macroinvertebrates, frogbit had no measurable
negative effect on surface macroinvertebrates, and areas
covered by frogbit had more diverse insect taxa (Table 1,
Fig. 2AñC). The effects of frogbit cover on benthic macroinvertebrates
were more complicated and were inconsistent
with our hypothesis. Fewer worms and more chironomids
were collected by HesterñDendy bottom samplers in untreated than in plants-absent sites, but no differences
were detected in Ekman grab samples. However, we think
it is likely that the diversity of benthic macroinvertebrates
was higher in sites with than without frogbit (e.g., 15 June;
Fig. 4B). High variability in the initial samples (Fig. 4A)
might have interfered with our ability to detect a significant
difference. Therefore, we reanalyzed the data for 15 June
and included hand pulling and shading sites (before treatments
were applied). Simpsonís diversity index was significantly
higher at sites with than without frogbit (F = 7.645,
df = 1, p = 0.015).
Sites with frogbit mats supported a more diverse surface
macroinvertebrate community (and possibly benthic
community) than sites without frogbit. Similar findings
have been reported by other investigators (e.g., Kaenel
et al. 1998, Strayer et al. 2003). Aquatic plants, including invasive floating species like frogbit, Eurasian water chestnut
(Trapa natans L.), and water hyacinth (Eicchornia
crassipes), provide food (themselves or epiphytic species,
including bacteria, phytoplankton, zooplankton, and small
invertebrates), refuge from predation, and nursery habitat
(Kaenel et al. 1998, Covich et al. 1999). Kaenel et al. (1998)
reported much higher total numbers of invertebrates in
aquatic plant beds before than after removal, and the taxa
most affected by plant removal were those that use macrophytes
as habitat (e.g., Simuliidae and Chironomidae). Epiphytic
and benthic macroinvertebrates were more abundant
in water chestnut beds than in open water in the
Hudson River, New York, results that suggested a systemwide
increase in biodiversity and food for fish following
invasion (Strayer et al. 2003).
The positive effect of European frogbit on macroinvertebrate
communities differed from our expectations that
European frogbit would negatively affect benthic macro-invertebrates in Oneida Lake by decreasing DO (Zhu et al.
2008). This effect has not been studied for frogbit, but
Eurasian water chestnut supported more abundant macroinvertebrates
than native wild celery (Vallisneria americana)
in the tidal Hudson River even though the water
chestnut areas were hypoxic or even anoxic at times (Strayer
et al. 2003). However, Feldman (2001) found greater density
of phytophilous macroinvertebrates in native wild celery
than in water chestnut beds in the upper Hudson River,
and Cattaneo et al. (1998) found no difference in macroinvertebrate
density between native plant beds and water
chestnut beds in an Italian lake. Thus, the effects of water
chestnut on macroinvertebrates appear to be location specific,
and this variability may also be the case for frogbit.
Effects of hand pulling and shading methods
Hand pulling is an ancient weed removal technique
(Randall and Marinelli 1996). It has been used to remove
tons of water chestnuts from Lake Champlain, Vermont
(USA), since 1960 and to remove the same plant from
Oneida Lake, New York (Countryman 1970, Zhu et al.
2008). This method has been used with some success to
remove European frogbit (e.g., Langdon 2007), and did not
affect surface or benthic macroinvertebrates when compared
to untreated sites (Table 2, Figs 5AñC, 6A, B). Thus,
hand pulling is a preferred control method for maintaining
macroinvertebrate communities while removing invasive
floating plants. However, hand pulling must be done at
least biweekly to control frogbit effectively (BZ, unpublished
data).
Shading also had little effect on macroinvertebrates although
the density of organisms tended to be lower in
shading sites than in untreated or hand pulling sites (e.g.,
amphipods in the HesterñDendy surface samples). This
result suggests a potential negative effect of the shading
method on macroinvertebrate communities. Amphipods
were mostly of the family Gammaridae, which are omnivores
and may prey on other small invertebrates, such
as chironomids and isopods (Berezina and Panov 2003).
Those potential prey items were least abundant in the shading
sites. The low abundance might be a consequence of
low DO (Catling et al. 2003, Zhu et al. 2008) or low food
availability, e.g., periphytic algae (Quinn et al. 1997,Melody
and Richardson 2004), associated with shading. Quinn et al.
(1997) studied a pasture stream for 142 d and found that
total invertebrate and chironomid densities declined significantly
as shade increased from 60 to 90% and invertebrate
taxon richness declined markedly between 90 and 98%
shade. Melody and Richardson (2004) investigated shading
and litter input in a forest stream and reported that algal
filaments were longer in the high-light treatments, a finding
indicating a change in periphyton composition, which
would affect macroinvertebrates and might limit secondary
production. Therefore, shading is a less preferred method
than hand pulling for controlling frogbit while maintaining
the macroinvertebrate communities in the lakes.
Managing invasive species requires implementation of
control methods. Both the efficiency of the control method
and its environmental consequences must be studied to
prevent undesirable or unpredictable outcomes. A thorough
knowledge of both aspects is needed to improve the
efficacy of invasive species management and to promote
development of new management strategies.